JACOB GREBER, POLITICAL EDITOR: In the West Bank, Israeli bulldozers were busy last week tearing down a Palestinian farmer’s olive groves.

A source of pride, and his livelihood.

KHALIL AL FARI, PALESTINIAN LAND OWNER (translated): What did the olives do to them? These olive trees, what did they do? When you see the olive trees being uprooted by the bulldozer, it breaks your heart.

JACOB GREBER: A day later, a funeral for two Palestinian teens. Local officials said they were killed by Israeli settlers and soldiers in an attack on their village.

All adding to anxiety over Israel's settler movement and fears it’s undermining a future Palestinian state.

ED MILIBAND, UK FOREIGN SECRETARY: And it is precisely this belief in the rights and freedoms of the Israeli and Palestinian people that leads many, including me, to a deep sense of shame about what has unfolded in Palestine under the eyes of the international community.

JACOB GREBER: Ed Miliband, the son of a Holocaust survivor, becoming the first British foreign secretary to declare that Israel’s 1967 occupation of the West Bank is against international law.

ED MILIBAND: Now, for a long time, the British government has rightly said settlements are illegal, but we have remained silent on the question of the legality of the occupation as a whole, which in 2024, the International Court of Justice concluded was unlawful. Today I announce that the official view of the British government is that the occupation is unlawful.

JACOB GREBER: Ed Miliband told the House of Commons that Israel last month "crossed a long-standing red line" by issuing tenders for more than 1200 homes in a 12 square-kilometre slice of land east of Jerusalem known as E1.

ED MILIBAND: Let's be absolutely clear what this means. The creation of a set of facts on the ground to make the two-state solution unviable.

JACOB GREBER: In response, Britain is now moving to impose an "import ban on goods from illegal settlements in the occupied territories".

ED MILIBAND: The British government agrees that there is ethnic cleansing of Palestinians in areas of the West Bank - perpetrated by settler terrorists, and all too often the Israeli government has turned a blind eye to this and worse, members of it have made statements and taken actions to support the forced displacement of Palestinians.

GIDEON SA'AR, ISRAELI FOREIGN MINISTER: The accusations made today by the Foreign Secretary in the British Parliament were outrageous lies.

JACOB GREBER: Israel's foreign minister retaliated with a vow to close the British consulate in East Jerusalem.

GIDEON SA'AR: Any foreign activity in the area must be conducted through accepted and agreed channels and without violating Israel's sovereignty.

JACOB GREBER: Britain is not the only country planning to put restrictions on trade from illegal settlements. Canada, France, Spain and Sweden are among those on board.

Even the Trump administration – a staunch supporter of the Netanyahu government – appeared reluctant to criticise Britain’s move.

MARCO RUBIO, US SECRETARY OF STATE: We were made aware they were going to make this decision. We heard their arguments as to why, but look, we share the goal of stability.

JACOB GREBER: But there have been notable abstentions, including Germany, Italy, Japan and New Zealand.

The Australian Government has also quietly balked at joining Britain’s outright trade ban – a decision that was today welcomed by Israel’s ambassador.

PENNY WONG, FOREIGN MINISTER: Australia is not, at this time, pursuing a blanket-style import ban. We have concerns about the implementation of a blanket ban and unintended consequences for Australian businesses for Palestinians and for Israelis.

JACOB GREBER: A position that has angered many progressives, even on the government's backbench.

ED HUSIC, LABOR MP: We can't say we are for the state of Palestine, which I'm very much a supporter of, and ignore the fact that the illegal settlements are undermining the ability for a state of Palestine to emerge. We need to take action.

DAVID SHOEBRIDGE, GREENS SENATOR: The reason why they're not taking action is apparently to help Palestinians? This is unbelievable gaslighting from Labor.

JULIAN LEESER, LIBERAL FRONTBENCHER: The key thing we want to get in Israel and Palestine is a two-state solution, and the question is whether any of these sanctions actually lead you towards a two-state solution and I'm not sure that they do.

JACOB GREBER: The Albanese Government's reluctance to join Britain's trade ban contrasts with a year ago, when it worked with countries led by Canada, France and the UK on the recognition of a Palestinian state.

This year, it has instead emphasised that it will continue to take direct action by targeting supporters of the settler movement.

PENNY WONG: Right now, Australians can’t trade with sanctioned individuals or entities in the West Bank.

JACOB GREBER: Other reasons for not joining the UK's trade ban include concerns it would undermine Australia's status as a trading nation and that it's a blunt instrument.

It’s also worth remembering the Prime Minister has a long history of battling the Greens in his own seat over the Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions movement against Israel.

PENNY WONG: We have taken action that Prime Minister Netanyahu’s government has made very clear that they are more than displeased with.

JACOB GREBER: With Israel heading to an election in late October, tensions over settlements are unlikely to abate.

In the meantime, Australia’s official position is to pursue “further targeted measures” against what it calls “illegal settlements and settler violence”.

PENNY WONG: We've been clear the Netanyahu government's actions in the West Bank, the rapid expansion of settlements, the proposed E1 settlement development and flagrant settler violence are extinguishing the possibility of a two-state solution, and that remains the only path to enduring peace and security for Israelis and Palestinians.

SARAH FERGUSON: Joining me now live from Westminster is the chair of the UK Foreign Affairs Select Committee, Labour MP Dame Emily Thornberry.

Dame Emily Thornberry, welcome to 7.30.

EMILY THORNBERRY, CHAIR OF THE UK FOREIGN AFFAIRS SELECT COMMITTEE: Thank you.

SARAH FERGUSON: Why has the UK government chosen this moment to deliver new sanctions, so close to the Israeli election?

EMILY THORNBERRY: I think it's our own timetable, and our own timetable is this. The Labour government, I think, took the, took Britain in a different direction, in terms of foreign policy, and it was largely in the right place but just never went far enough when it came to the Middle East.

And so, with the change of prime minister, it was an opportunity for us to get it right and to push much further. And so, for people like me who have been campaigning for years, this was a really important moment and we were very pleased to see that the new prime minister, the new foreign secretary, and the new minister responsible for the Middle East, all agreed that we had to go further and we had to, at last, introduce trade sanctions with the West Bank and with the occupied territories.

We have a trade agreement with Israel. We give, we give tariffs that are on a beneficial basis to Israel proper but not to the West Bank. But we just needed to stop trade with the West Bank, but also perhaps even more importantly, we started seeing some flats that were being built as part of the settlement project, being advertised in London, it was completely disgusting. And we had to stop that.

So, we're also stopping all services. So no money is to go through London, no financial assistance, no mortgages, no estate agents and assistance, nothing, nothing like that, no architects, nothing. We are not to help the building of these settlements and the attempt by this far-right Netanyahu government to snuff out Palestine. We're not going to be involved it in the any way.

SARAH FERGUSON: Let's talk about the moment, however, because there are senior Israelis opposed to the Netanyahu government, and opposed to the settlement projects, who say you should have waited till after the election, because this risks bolstering Netanyahu and his government.

EMILY THORNBERRY: Well, we've had a whole load of different criticisms, some saying that it doesn't amount to anything. It doesn't amount to anything, so why are we bothering? On the other hand, we are told it amounts to a great deal, and it could affect the election.

Can I just say two things. First of all, my view is, I agree with them this is the wrong time, it should have happened two years ago, at the very least. We should have done it much earlier than we have.

SARAH FERGUSON: If I may...

EMILY THORNBERRY: This new government has only been in for seven weeks.

SARAH FERGUSON: If I may jump in for a moment though, given you say it should have happened some time ago, could you not have waited a number of weeks until after the election?

EMILY THORNBERRY: Do you know what, I think the thing that may affect whether Netanyahu gets re-elected or not, is these new reports that coming out, that he was warned, or his government was warned that there was going to be the attack on Israeli citizens, and that it wasn't, that there was no reaction to it. And, and I think that there's a lot of anger developing in Israel about that.

Listen, Israel is a democracy. People have lots and lots of different opinions. Some people might say that what is happening in the UK is somehow supporting Netanyahu, a lot of other people may well say that it is wrong, it's terrible for Israel to become increasingly isolated from the international community, because of the behaviour of its far-right government.

And actually, for Israel to kind of step back into the fold, it will be good if they were able to change the direction in which they're going and the way in which they're treating Palestinians.

SARAH FERGUSON: Now as you know, Australia works very closely with the UK and other countries, both in support of a future Palestinian state, and to prevent the, to prevent further settlement building in the West Bank. Did you expect the Australian government would join the UK in this action?

EMILY THORNBERRY: I think it was hoped that they might. But, you know, all countries have than our decisions to make. We all want the same thing. And nobody says this is easy. This is hard.

I have a lot of time for Penny Wong, and I don't know the basis upon which she has made a decision not to be involved with us, but I'm sure that she believes what she's doing is in the interests of Palestinians and the interests of justice. Obviously, we take a slightly different view.

SARAH FERGUSON: Well, the reason that Australia, as we understand so far, doesn't support the import ban, is, according to Penny Wong, because it could have unintended consequences for businesses, for Palestinians, as well as Israelis. So why do you think that this is an effective tool when the foreign minister Penny Wong, who as you say, has the same, wants the same thing for the Palestinians, she disagrees with you about that?

EMILY THORNBERRY: I think that the ambassador from Palestine has had a big influence here in the UK. He has made it clear that it is in the interests of Palestinians for this to happen.

There's also sometimes people say, well, how can we be sure whether these goods come from Israel or whether they come from Palestine? But because we've had a trade agreement with Israel, where we've only been focused on goods from Israel proper, and have distinguished between those from Palestine, we have been able to get around problems in terms of the rules of origin, and we believe we can continue to do so.

Perhaps we start from a slightly different place and there are different discussions happening. But, you know, I'm always happy to talk to my Australian friends and maybe even persuade them.

SARAH FERGUSON: At the same time, the amount of money that the UK trades with the settlements, we don't have an exact number, but we understand it to be very small. So is this anything more than symbolic which links to my previous questions about the timing. Is this just a symbolic act?

EMILY THORNBERRY: This is doing the right thing. This is looking at the law, looking at, looking at morality, looking at what's going on in the West Bank and in Gaza, and saying, we have to, we can't just stand on the sidelines and wring our hands. We have to do something about it.

We have taken out sanctions against particular individuals, but we have to take a much broader approach to it. And we must take a stance. And we're very pleased that we've been able to do that in conjunction with some of our friends and allies. We need to be strong about this, forthright and clear.

SARAH FERGUSON: I want to ask you about how this relates to British domestic politics. You have got a new prime minister, obviously, a new foreign minister, in Ed Miliband, and a party conference just around the corner. Is this also a way of shoring up Labour's progressive wing, who are unhappy for so long under Keir Starmer?

EMILY THORNBERRY: Listen, it was about getting in a new prime minister. Having conversations with him early. I don't, I'm not making a secret of the fact that my first conversation with the new prime minister was, you need to sort this out on foreign policy, We've got this wrong and we need to move on it, and move on it clearly.

I spoke to Ed Miliband about it as well and I know I'm not the only person. There was a lot of discontent that whenever we did anything on the Middle East, we were always doing too little, too late.

I was part of a move that had been trying to get the recognition of Palestine. I had been campaigning for it for 15 years. And was really pleased when the government finally agreed to it. But it should've been, it should have happened a long time ago. We feel as though, in Britain, we're always, you know, trailing on after the events. And that's why we had to kind of get in front of this.

And with the new government, it was a really good opportunity to change the way in which we approached this and to be clear, and to change the tone, but also to change the approach.

SARAH FERGUSON: Now, Ed Miliband described today, a deep, deep sense of urgency about the West Bank, and about the building of settlements. Australia, clearly, concurs with that view. But what does this act do meaningfully, to hold back settlement building? I'm thinking particularly about the large settlement called E1, which would, if it goes ahead, split the potential future Palestinian state? What does this do practically to hold back settlement building?

EMILY THORNBERRY: I mean, it's a good point. You know, because, those complaining about the timing of this, sort of, it's convenient for them to overlook that contracts have been put out for the building on this area called E1, and for viewers who may not know this, E1 is the final little bit of the puzzle, of the jigsaw, that is going to finally cut Palestine in two, and cut it off from East Jerusalem.

This will have a massive effect on Palestine; it has to stop. And actually, the Americans, until now, have been holding the Israelis back, but the Americans seem to be distracted and not paying attention to this sufficiently now and so it looks like the Israelis, this far right government thinks that they can go ahead with it.

So the contracts as far as I know have been gone out for tender and will be signed the week before the general election in Israel.

Now, that timing is presumably done on purpose and people then can't turn around and say, why is Britain doing this so urgently? Well, it's clear. We don't want any British architects to be helping with the building of E1. We do not want to have any building contractors, any material coming from the UK, any money, any assistance to the building of E1.

We do not want to be involved in any of those contracts, and we want to keep well away from it, because it's in breach of international law and it is morally wrong.

SARAH FERGUSON: Just to finish, I wanted to ask you for your comments on the responses, as we understand it, from the United States. Surprisingly, perhaps, Marco Rubio was very measured, said they knew about the decision that was about to be taken by the British, but did not express any anger or opposition to the move. Did that take you by surprise?

EMILY THORNBERRY: No. What we're doing is in accordance with international law.

SARAH FERGUSON: No, I guess, what I'm asking you...

EMILY THORNBERRY: The Israeli...

SARAH FERGUSON: Is it surprising for the Americans to react in this way? In quite a mild way?

EMILY THORNBERRY: Well, the Israelis had, this Israeli government has explicitly said what that they're doing, they're doing on purpose, to extinguish the hope, the possibility, of a Palestinian state. They are doing this on purpose, they are going as fast as they can.

It is right for us, as sovereign nations, to do everything we can to try to stop it. We, particularly Britain, has a responsibility, during our time, when we had the mandate, when we were the charge of the whole area, where we gave such encouragement and assistance to the creation of the state of Israel but we did let down the Palestinians and the Palestinians deserve to have a state as well, and they deserve to have some justice. We can't just carry on standing on the sidelines and going, oh, isn't this awful. I wish we could do something about it. Well, we can.

SARAH FERGUSON: Dame Emily Thornberry, thank you very much indeed for joining me. I appreciate it.

EMILY THORNBERRY: Not at all.
