[PAGE 1]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education
Volume 40 | Issue 11 Article 5
2015
Promoting Online Students’ Engagement and
Learning in Science and Sustainability Preservice
Teacher Education
Louisa Tomas
James Cook University, louisa.tomas@jcu.edu.au
Michelle Lasen
James Cook University
Ellen Field
James Cook University
Keith Skamp
Southern Cross University
This Journal Article is posted at Research Online.
http://ro.ecu.edu.au/ajte/vol40/iss11/5
Recommended Citation
Tomas, L., Lasen, M., Field, E., & Skamp, K. (2015). Promoting Online Students’ Engagement and Learning in Science and
Sustainability Preservice Teacher Education. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 40(11).
http://dx.doi.org/10.14221/ajte.2015v40n11.5
[PAGE 2]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  79 
Promoting Online Students’ Engagement and Learning in  
Science and Sustainability Preservice Teacher Education 
 
 
Louisa Tomas 
Michelle Lasen 
Ellen Field 
James Cook University 
Keith Skamp, 
Southern Cross University 
 
 
Abstract: At James Cook University, a core first-year subject within 
the Bachelor of Education, Foundations of Sustainability in 
Education (FSE), sees students investigate the underlying science and 
complexity of socioecological challenges through inquiry, place-
based learning, experimentation and consideration of classroom 
practice. Given that this subject is delivered across modes, a blended 
learning approach that encompasses an innovative use of learning 
technologies and careful consideration of pedagogy provides 
opportunity for both on-campus and online students to engage in 
active, learner-centred, collaborative, experiential and praxis-
oriented learning experiences (Wals & Jickling, 2002). In this paper, 
we draw upon Pittaway’s (2012) engagement framework and 
Herrington, Herrington, Oliver, Stoney and Willis’s (2001) guidelines 
for quality online courses to explore students’ perceptions and 
experiences of FSE. We investigate how a blended learning design 
can support the development of a robust foundational knowledge base 
in science and sustainability education, and engagement in active, 
experiential and praxis-oriented learning experiences for first year 
online students. This paper furthers the discussion around best 
pedagogical practice and blended learning design for science and 
sustainability education in online preservice teacher education, and 
in other disciplines in teacher education that call for hands-on 
learning experiences in an online environment. 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Research indicates that the current generation of school leavers entering university is 
more technically competent and confident than any previous student intake and, as such, has 
high expectations of universities to provide robust and engaging online learning 
environments and technologies (Jeffries & Hyde, 2010). However, generalisations about 
‘digital natives’ (Prensky, 2001) are likely to mask complexities related to differences in, and 
the potential impact of socio-economic and cultural factors on, young people’s technology 
uses and skills (Bennett, Maton, & Kervin, 2008). For instance, underprepared students and 
those who are the first in their families to attend university are likely to differ from their 
young peers in regard to their capacity to adapt to university study, the level of monitoring 
and support that they need for successful participation, and prior experience with online 
[PAGE 3]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  80 
learning and learning management systems (Brinthaupt, Fisher, Gardner, Raffo, & 
Woodward, 2011).  
In Australia, it is worth noting that the widening participation agenda in higher 
education is not only reflected in a doubling of the participation rate (1982–2010) for school 
leavers but also for students in their twenties (Norton, 2013). Jeffries and Hyde’s (2010) 
study revealed a changing landscape for learning, especially for those ‘mature’ aged students 
(i.e. over 21 upon entry) who have had no prior experience of using technology for learning 
and yet, on account of busy lives involving employment and family responsibilities, are 
dependent on accessing technology to undertake their studies. Indeed, for many higher 
education students in the second decade of the 21st century, “the existence of all day, every 
day online access” is an essential requirement and support for study (Jeffries & Hyde, 2010, 
p. 134).  
While research shows that learners are likely to assume greater responsibility for their 
learning in online learning environments (Jeffries & Hyde, 2010), there are also heightened 
expectations on their part for the provision of adequate learning support (Kawka & Larkin, 
2011). According to Kawka and Larkin (2011), the support that is required by online students 
“relates both to authentic learning and assessment experiences, as well as assistance in 
communicating with lecturers, tutors and peers” (p. 40).  
In terms of online delivery, research efforts have tended to focus generally on the 
effectiveness of the medium itself (Reeves, Herrington, & Oliver, 2005), and, more 
specifically, on the utilisation of particular tools or strategies (Brinthaupt et al., 2011). The 
literature now calls for greater attention to aspects of curriculum and content organisation, 
pedagogy, assessment, communication, support strategies and resources that promote student 
engagement and learning (Brinthaupt et al., 2011; Green et al., 2010). According to Fan and 
Lê (2011), in order to cater better to students’ learning needs in online environments, research 
is needed that privileges “the views of both staff and students, particularly their evaluative 
judgements” (p. 367).  
The need for determining and ensuring quality in the process of designing and 
delivering online learning is an increasingly important issue for higher education institutions 
worldwide (Herrington et al., 2001). The past five years have seen a substantial expansion in 
the number of universities offering preservice teacher education courses in an online or 
‘blended’ mode (i.e. technology-enhanced instructional design that draws together physical 
and online learning environments) (Fasso, Knight, & Knight, 2013; Green et al., 2010; 
Kawka & Larkin, 2011; Keppell & Riddle, 2011). At James Cook University (JCU), we offer 
preservice teacher education courses in early childhood, primary and secondary majors across 
multiple modes of delivery and campuses. A Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) in early 
childhood education is delivered wholly online, of which the student cohorts typically 
comprise females in their twenties and thirties, with family and work responsibilities, from 
rural and regional contexts in Queensland and interstate. While these mature students are 
likely to have acquired a range of learning experiences, both formal and informal (often 
within the early childhood care and education sector), many are the first in their families to 
undertake higher education. Responding to diverse student needs and delivery contexts has 
substantially impacted the pedagogical and technological knowledge of the Education 
academic staff within our College (Kennedy et al., 2008).  
At JCU, Foundations of Sustainability in Education (FSE) is a compulsory subject (or 
‘unit’) for first-year preservice teachers that engages them in the underlying science and 
complexity of socioecological challenges, such as global climate change and premature 
species extinction, through inquiry, place-based learning, experimentation and consideration 
of classroom pedagogy. Given that FSE is undertaken by students studying on-campus and 
wholly online, a key consideration in the development of the subject was how to address the 
challenge of engaging students in an online context, with a view to develop foundational 
[PAGE 4]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  81 
knowledge in science and sustainability education, and to engage students in active, 
experiential and praxis-orientated learning. In this paper, we investigate how a blended 
learning design can support online students’ learning and engagement by exploring the 
perceptions and experiences of a cohort of students who studied FSE in the online mode. We 
utilise two lenses – Herrington and colleagues’ (2001) framework for evaluating online 
learning settings and Pittaway’s (2012) engagement framework – to analyse students’ 
perceptions regarding their engagement and learning vis-à-vis the subject’s content modules 
and resources, scaffolded learning experiences, assessment tasks, and communication and 
support strategies. As reflexive practitioners, this focus is important as we are interested in 
the extent to which the blended learning approach adopted in the subject successfully engages 
our online students in active, learner-centred, collaborative, experiential and praxis-oriented 
learning experiences (Wals & Jickling, 2002), while developing a foundational knowledge 
base in an intellectually rigorous subject. While these aspects underpin science and 
sustainability education, they are potentially challenging to facilitate in an online learning 
environment. We aim to inform best practice regarding the design and development of online 
and blended learning environments in science and sustainability preservice teacher education, 
and believe that our findings have relevance to other learning areas in teacher education that 
also call for active learning approaches in an online environment.  
In the sections that follow, we begin by reviewing the literature on online learning in 
both higher and teacher education, before outlining the aim of the current study and our 
chosen interpretative frameworks.  
 
 
Online Learning in Higher and Teacher Education: Challenges and Opportunities 
 
Online learning presents both challenges and opportunities to promote student 
engagement and learning. There is evidence in the literature that online learning 
environments can provide different affordances than physical learning spaces (Johnson, 
Adams Becker, Estrada, & Freeman, 2014) and, hence, more creative learning opportunities 
(Salyers, Carter, Barrett, & Williams, 2010). The literature is also suggestive that online 
learning environments can be more responsive to different learning styles and rhythms 
(Pombo, Smith, Abelha, Caixinha, & Costa, 2012). Fan and Lê (2011) proposed that: 
 
Due to its adaptability to various learning styles, paces and contents, web-based 
learning has a stronger potential than the face-to-face learning mode to satisfy 
students with varied learning needs and preferences. This adaptability is desired by 
Australian universities as it fits with a high level of diversity in student populations, 
backgrounds and preferred learning styles. (p. 373) 
 
According to Brinthaupt et al. (2011), a “productive and transformational approach” 
to online teaching entertains no notions of it being less demanding or time consuming than 
face-to-face teaching “or something that can be put on autopilot” (p. 522). Instead, it 
recognises that, on account of a well-designed online learning environment, the teacher is 
free to shift their attention from transmitting content to fostering student engagement, 
stimulating intellectual development and building rapport with students. In this way, online 
and blended learning environments can facilitate a shift from didactic teaching to 
constructivist, collaborative and student-centred learning approaches (Beldarrin, 2006; Fan & 
Lê, 2011) – approaches that are conducive to sustainability and science education.  
It is important to note that our paper informs a scant literature on facilitating 
sustainability education in online teacher education environments. Having delivered an 
environmental education elective for preservice teachers online at JCU since 2001, which has 
[PAGE 5]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  82 
sustained high levels of student enrolments and satisfaction over time, Whitehouse (2008) 
concluded that, “well-conceived, web-based delivery is certainly no barrier to teaching and 
learning environmental education in the tertiary sector” (p. 11). Initially concerned with “how 
to engage students meaningfully with place-based learning through the no-place of 
cyberspace”, Whitehouse (2008, p. 11) reflected on learning and pedagogical design aspects 
of the fourth-year elective, as follows:  
 
Students enrolled in e-learning subjects have to learn how to learn online as well as 
offline and make effective use of information communication technologies … I 
deliberately designed learning and assessment options that require my students to shut 
down their computers and go offline and outdoors to undertake activities of their 
choosing … Online delivery can realise quality outcomes if the principles of 
participatory inquiry are kept firmly in mind. (pp. 12, 15, & 17)   
 
The assessment requirements of her online subject saw students undertake self-guided field 
visits to local environmental education facilities; ‘learning investigations’ that could be 
replicated with school age children (e.g. Plant a Garbage Garden, Mapping my Place); a 
research/curriculum assessment project (e.g. ‘Learnscapes’ analysis of a school ground, 
designing a web-quest); and reflective posts on the discussion board. In contrast with 
Whitehouse’s (2008) emphasis on self-directed and largely individual, place-based inquiry, 
Briano, Midor and Trentin (1997), in much earlier work, highlighted the potential of online 
environments to facilitate collaborative, interdisciplinary, project-based learning in 
environmental education, for Italian teachers and their students. While the article reported 
significant logistical challenges in the structuring and facilitation of the project groups, which 
needed to be addressed, the authors concluded that the pedagogical approach allowed the 
teachers who engaged in all phases of the projects to develop skills in environmental 
education project planning and implementation, problem solving and working in 
interdisciplinary teams.  
More recently, in the context of online teacher professional development, Pombo and 
colleagues (2012) investigated the efficacy of a blended e-module in enhancing Portuguese 
primary school teachers’ assessment practices in science education, through group-based and 
reflective learning experiences. While participant teachers reported that their new learnings 
extended their classroom repertoire of science assessment and teaching strategies and tools, 
the authors concluded that participant teachers would benefit from a further blending of 
strategies in the e-module in order to enhance opportunities for inter-group sharing, possibly 
through peer assessment activities utilising asynchronous online tools, as well as face-to-face 
interaction with module facilitators (Pombo et al., 2012).  
Sinha, Khreisat and Sharma (2009) identified four key interactions that shape learning 
processes in the online environment: (1) learner–content interaction; (2) learner–instructor 
interaction; (3) learner–learner interaction; and (4) learner–interface interaction (i.e. the 
interaction between learner and tools in order to perform requisite tasks). Online learners 
have reported on the benefits of both asynchronous and synchronous strategies to support 
such interactions (Beldarrin, 2006). There is broad consensus in the literature that, for 
effective online learning to occur, it is ultimately important to create a ‘community of 
learners’, wherein the quantity and quality of interactions promote student engagement 
(Abedin, Daneshgar, & D’Ambra, 2010; Oliveira, Tinoca, & Pereira, 2011).  
Fasso et al. (2013) proposed an online learning design framework, in the context of 
teacher education, which aligns Dettmer’s (2006) phases of learning and doing with learner-
centred pedagogies enabled by Learning Management System (LMS) and Web 2.0 tools. The 
framework enables preservice teachers to engage in the sociocultural practices of an online 
community as knowledge creators, rather than knowledge consumers, and, positioned as 
[PAGE 6]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  83 
such, to achieve higher order learning outcomes. In a similar vein, Green et al. (2010) 
evaluated a design approach to online early childhood teacher education, underpinned by 
notions of “learning as knowledge creation” and “teaching through assessment with 
technologies” (p. 270). These authors reported on an assessment schedule that built on the 
experiential bases and sociocultural contexts of their online students – many of whom were 
working in education and child care settings in addition to studying, as is the case for our 
online cohort – by way of tasks that called for resource sharing, co-creation of documents and 
personal reflection. Green and colleagues (2010) observed an evolving shift in their 
pedagogical emphases from knowledge acquisition to student-centred and self-directed 
engagement in “knowledge-creating communities” (Hong & Sullivan, 2009, cited in Green et 
al., 2010, p. 270). 
 
 
Aim, Research Question and Interpretative Frameworks 
 
Student engagement is increasingly understood as a prerequisite for learning and, 
hence, an emerging priority in preservice teacher education (Pittaway, 2012). Engagement is 
particularly important for online students given their need for often greater responsibility and 
self-discipline than on-campus students (Brinthaupt et al., 2011; Jeffries & Hyde, 2010) – 
who interact face-to-face in class settings where peer and staff support “can appear more 
real” (Pittaway, 2012, p. 37) – to actively engage themselves in meaningful tasks for 
effective learning to occur (Simon, 2002). Our study aims to investigate how blended 
learning design can promote online preservice teacher engagement and learning in science 
and sustainability education. Within this context, the research question that guided the 
development of the research design was: 
 
In what ways does a blended learning design promote the development of a robust 
foundational knowledge base within a discipline or field of study in teacher 
education, and engage first year online university students in active, experiential 
and praxis-oriented learning experiences? 
 
This research question reflects our view that the findings reported in this paper have 
applicability in other university areas of learning apart from science and sustainability 
education. The frameworks we use to interpret the findings, and hence respond to this 
research question, also enhance this study’s transferability to other areas. 
We utilise Pittaway’s (2012) engagement framework to investigate the ways in which 
the first-year students of this study engaged or disengaged in the online delivery of FSE. 
Pittaway’s (2012) framework was developed as a tool for academics “to enhance unit design 
and development, teaching practice and student support” in both online and face-to-face 
modes of delivery (p. 37). It comprises “five distinctive yet intersecting, non-hierarchical 
elements” of engagement (Pittaway, 2012, p. 38), as follows: (1) personal, (2) academic, (3) 
intellectual, (4) social, and (5) professional elements (see Tab. 1). We saw utility in the 
framework given that it was developed for Faculty of Education academics in a regional 
Australian University, as is true of the authors’ context, and is applicable to online contexts 
as well. 
  
[PAGE 7]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  84 
Personal  Having a level of confidence that a university education is achievable, being aware of 
intentions of and motivation for enrolling, and having or developing perseverance. 
Academic  
Planning, monitoring and evaluating learning, becoming effective note-takers, readers, 
listeners and problem solvers, and becoming familiar with other aspects of academic 
culture including academic writing and information and computer literacy. 
Intellectual Engaging with ideas, concepts and disciplinary thinking associated with education and 
the social, political, civic, moral and ethical issues that are part of formal education. 
Social  Forming positive relationships with tutors and unit coordinators, and being proactive in 
becoming part of a learning community. 
Professional 
Connecting with teachers, principals and others within professional experience settings, 
being involved in classroom life, joining professional associations, and attending 
professional learning opportunities, workshops and conferences. 
Table 1: Pittaway’s (2012) elements of engagement and engagement behaviours . Source: Pittaway, 2012, 
pp. 39-44. 
 
The second analytical lens that we employ in this paper – Herrington and colleagues’ 
(2001) quality guidelines for online courses – is a framework that was developed at an 
Australian university in order to provide a university-wide tool for “instructional design and 
consistent assessment and evaluation of online learning materials” (p. 266). It identifies three 
main areas of focus (pedagogy, resources and delivery strategies) and, what are deemed to be, 
critical elements of effective learning environments related to these areas (see Tab. 2). 
According to Herrington et al. (2001), the framework is intended to provide academics with 
the capacity to evaluate the potential effectiveness of online units through “a determination of 
the scope and extent of these critical elements” (p. 266). While we acknowledge other more 
recent guidelines for evaluating online education within the literature (e.g. Parsell, 2014) we 
found that our chosen framework resonated strongly with our data, and provided a powerful 
frame to investigate student perceptions of what elements supported their engagement and 
learning in the online subject under review. 
 
Pedagogies Authentic tasks; Opportunities for collaboration; Learner-centred environments; 
Engaging; Meaningful assessments. 
Resources Accessibility; Currency; Richness; Purposeful use of media; Inclusivity. 
Delivery strategies Reliable and robust interface; Clear goals, directions and learning plans; Communication; 
Equity and accessibility; Appropriate corporate style. 
Table 2: Herrington and colleagues’ (2001) three main areas and associated critical elements of effective 
online learning environments. Source: Herrington et al., 2001, pp. 267-269. 
 
 
Research Context 
 
In response to JCU’s Curriculum Refresh Project, Australia’s University for the 
Tropics (Australian Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, 2009–
2011), and recognition of sustainability as a cross-curriculum priority in the Australian 
Curriculum (Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority, n.d.), the School 
of Education adopted a whole-of-program approach to embedding sustainability in its B.Ed.. 
Academic staff engaged in collaborative projects in order to design two new dedicated 
sustainability subjects (FSE, the focus of this paper, and a fourth-year capstone, Service 
Learning for Sustainable Futures); revise aspects of content in a longstanding elective 
(Whitehouse, 2008); and embed sustainability principles, concepts and issues in other early 
childhood and primary subjects in the B.Ed. (see Lasen et al., 2015; Simoncini, Lasen, & 
Rocco, 2014).  
[PAGE 8]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  85 
FSE was designed collaboratively by three academics (including the first and second 
authors) with disciplinary and curriculum expertise in science, science education and social 
science. Input was also sought from an online designer and academics from other 
universities, who facilitated sustainability subjects in preservice teacher education programs. 
An internal teaching and learning fellowship funded the fourth author, an academic with 
extensive expertise in environmental and science education including online delivery, to 
conduct an external evaluation of teaching and learning in the newly developed sustainability 
subjects. The external evaluation generated one of the data sources for this study. 
FSE seeks to develop students’ foundational knowledge of science, through exploration of 
the underlying science of key socioecological challenges – such as climate change, renewable 
and non-renewable energy, water availability and quality, and biodiversity conservation – and 
to model classroom pedagogies, involving experiential activities and hands-on 
experimentation, relating to sustainability and science education. Table 3 presents a summary 
of the blended learning design utilised in the online mode of FSE. The subject’s content is 
organised within six online modules hosted by Google Sites™ (Tab. 3) that adopt an 
overarching inquiry framework (with ‘tuning in’, ‘preparing to find out’, ‘finding out’, 
‘sorting out’ and ‘reflecting and taking action’ phases [Hamston & Murdoch, 1996]), in order 
to engage students in a weekly, scaffolded journey of learning and discovery. While this 
study focuses on the early childhood online cohort, student cohorts are enrolled in FSE across 
multiple modes, including on-campus offerings at JCU’s three major campuses, and a 
community-based delivery for Indigenous students. Cohorts share the one platform in the 
university’s online LMS (‘LearnJCU’) that hosts all learning materials (Tab. 3), and interact 
differently with teaching staff, activities, resources and technologies to achieve the subject’s 
learning outcomes through comparable learning experiences.  
 
Aspect of subject delivery for online cohort Engagement with learning environments 
Modules hosted by Google Sites™ and linked to LMS Online learning environment 
Lecture vodcasts Online learning environment 
Other subject materials (e.g. readings, assessment 
support documents) hosted by LearnJCU Online learning environment 
Tutorials facilitated using wikis 
(e.g. scaffolded online tutorials support simple science 
experiments) 
Online and physical learning environments  
Assessment task 1: Solar still investigation and report 
(i.e. conducting a science inquiry and communicating 
findings) 
Online and physical learning environments  
Assessment task 2: Sustainability inquiry and web story 
(i.e. investigation, photographing and communicating 
aspects of local sustainability issue) 
Online and physical learning environments  
Table 3: A summary of the blended learning design adopted for the online delivery of FSE.  
 
Intentional, student-centred blended learning design is recognised within the JCU 
(2014) Access, Participation and Success Plan, 2015-2017 as a key strategy to engage 
diverse learners. The blended learning approach in FSE involves deliberate pedagogical 
choices that are responsive to both the diversity of student cohorts and the nature of the 
subject matter itself. It may be described as an ‘enabling’ and ‘enhancing’ blend (Keppell, 
2010) in that it enables students’ participation by providing flexibility and overcoming issues 
of access and equity (e.g. through weekly lectures that are vodcasted for online students; Tab. 
3) and enhances learning and the student experience through engagement with online and 
physical learning environments (e.g. through hands-on activities and experiments that are 
scaffolded by online tutorials; Tab. 3). Through this blend, students develop a foundational 
[PAGE 9]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  86 
knowledge base in key science and sustainability concepts and engage in authentic learning 
opportunities appropriate for classroom practice. For the online cohort, the innovative use of 
learning technologies and purposeful assessment task design facilitates achievement of the 
subject’s intended learning outcomes, arguably providing students with a learning experience 
that is as rich and engaging as that of their on-campus peers. The assurance of “equivalent 
student learning outcomes regardless of a student’s place or mode of study” is a recognised 
priority in the current Australian higher education threshold standards (Department of 
Industry, Innovation, Science, Research and Tertiary Education, 2011, Ch. 3.1.9). 
The intended learning outcomes of FSE emphasise the development of a foundational 
knowledge base in science and sustainability education, as well as sustainability 
competencies and capabilities, such as critical, creative and systemic thinking and values 
clarification, as follows: 
  
  Recall, apply and communicate concepts and procedures of science and 
sustainability through multiple modes and genres to local and global contexts; 
 Explore how the design and implementation of engaging and intellectually 
challenging learning experiences promotes the development of scientific literacy;  
 Develop evidence-informed values and positions relating to sustainability 
through active citizenship, critical and systemic thinking, and reflection (JCU, 
2015a, para. 2) 
  
These learning outcomes reflect Fien and Maclean’s (2000) definition of education for 
sustainability as: 
 
… a new paradigm for a lifelong learning process that leads to an informed and 
involved citizenry having the creative problem solving skills, scientific, technological 
and social literacy and commitment to engage in responsible actions to ensure an 
environmentally sound, socially just and economically prosperous future for all. (p. 
37) 
 
At the same time, science education is foregrounded in the subject given that an 
understanding of the Earth’s systems and systems thinking are essential in empowering 
students to engage critically with the complex sustainability issues explored during the 
semester (Morse, 2000). Given that experiential learning is inherent to science and 
sustainability education – and the importance of place-based learning is increasingly 
recognised (i.e. connecting students with the resources, issues and values of their local 
community and environment) (Buxton, 2010; Green, 2012; Semken & Freeman, 2008; Smith 
& Sobel, 2012) – learning and assessment experiences in the subject are designed to get 
students ‘out and into’ their environment and working in active, hands-on ways.  
Weekly tutorials provide opportunities for experiential learning and modelling of 
classroom pedagogies for science and sustainability education (Tab. 3). For example, students 
perform simple science experiments and activities involving the simulation of the greenhouse 
effect in a jar, the identification of soil samples and the use of dichotomous keys to classify 
plants and animals. All of the activities and experiments are designed such that they can be 
performed with simple everyday materials, making them accessible to online students. At the 
same time, they are supported online by wikis hosted within the LMS that guide students 
through the activities. 
Experiential learning is also a key feature of the assessment schedule (Tab. 3). With a 
focus on the development of scientific literacy, all students are required to plan, conduct and 
report upon a solar still investigation that engages the principles and processes of a fair test, 
[PAGE 10]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  87 
the water cycle and sustainable ways of purifying water. Students also collaboratively 
investigate a local sustainability issue, through application of the strategic questioning 
framework (Peavey, 1994; United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation, 
2010), and communicate findings to a children’s audience through the creation of a digital 
web story. The focus here is on place-based learning and consideration of actions for a more 
sustainable future. The assessment schedule also includes a written examination wherein 
students are required to demonstrate foundational science and sustainability conceptual and 
pedagogical knowledge.  
In light of the nature of the content and the diversity of the student cohorts, we 
deemed it essential to design and deliver a subject that was learner-centred, supportive of 
deep and meaningful learning and praxis-oriented. In the design phase of the subject, we 
carefully considered what online technologies, within and outside of the university’s LMS, 
could support these pedagogical emphases and student achievement of learning outcomes. 
 
 
Methods 
 
Utilising a multi-method case study research design (Yin, 2009), we draw upon two 
sources of data (a student survey and student interviews) to explore the perceptions and 
experiences of a cohort of students who studied FSE online as part of the B.Ed. (Early 
Childhood Education) at JCU in 2012, with a view to understand better how they engaged in 
the subject’s online environment, and what elements of the subject supported their 
engagement and learning. In reviewing the literature for this study, we found that research 
papers concerned with online pedagogies tended to focus on a specific technological platform 
or tool in a specific context, demonstrate the tool’s effectiveness and then seek to generalise 
the tool’s effectiveness in all contexts – a kind of ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach (Knight & 
Gandomi, 2010). For example, there are numerous studies on the benefits and limitations of 
blogs for teaching and learning (see Koschman, Kelson, Feltovich, & Barrows, 1996; Oravec, 
2002; Saeed, Yang, & Sinnappan, 2009; Williams & Jacobs, 2004). However, within the 
LMS used for FSE, there are multiple tools that students engage with. Instead of focusing on 
the technological affordances of each tool or design feature, we have chosen to focus on 
students’ perceptions of their learning processes and levels of engagement in an online 
delivery that draws upon a variety of learning technologies. This approach allowed us to 
privilege the students’ voice so as to understand their learning experience while avoiding 
technological determinism wherein learning is tied to a specific technological platform or 
tool.  
  
 
Data Sources 
 
Within all sectors of education, student views of teaching and learning are becoming 
increasingly common as a perspective to be seriously considered (Baumfield, Hall, & Wall, 
2008; Flutter & Rudduck, 2004; Jenkins, 2006). In this study, we draw upon two sources of 
data that privilege the students’ voice. In order to understand better which elements of FSE, 
including the online environment, supported student engagement and learning, we canvassed 
the students’ voice through: (1) an online survey that was completed once at the end of the 
semester; and (2) interview data from the aforementioned external evaluation of FSE that was 
completed in December, 2012.  
Surveys are a reliable and valid tool for researchers and subject developers to evaluate 
web-based learning (Fan & Lê, 2011). The online survey was developed specifically for this 
study, comprising eight questions that generated evaluative data about the subject through 
[PAGE 11]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  88 
rating scales (including Likert-style scales), dichotomous questions and open-ended questions 
allowing for free response. Specifically, the survey explored the design and delivery of the 
subject (Question 1); aspects of the subject’s online delivery that supported students’ learning 
(e.g. their understanding of content knowledge, and the development of teaching strategies 
for science and sustainability education) (Question 2); students’ ratings of the extent to which 
the hands-on activities and experiments embedded in the subject were engaging (Question 3); 
students’ perceptions of the most and least effective aspects of the subject for their learning 
(Questions 4 and 5, respectively); students’ views as to whether they would have liked 
additional/alternative learning materials and other approaches to online learning and teaching 
(Questions 6 and 7, respectively); and students’ views on whether they had sufficient 
information communication technology (ICT) skills to undertake the subject online (Question 
8). 
Students were invited to participate in the research via a group email to the cohort. 
Twenty-seven participants (55% response rate) consented to completing the survey online 
and accessed the instrument through the LMS. Approximately 80 per cent of the respondents 
(n=22) were aged in their twenties and thirties; five respondents were aged in their forties; 
and one respondent was less than 20 years old. One respondent was male. Given that this 
profile is quite typical of the student demographic within the online cohort, it is likely that 
student survey responses reflect the views of the cohort, overall. 
 As part of the external evaluation, the fourth author conducted individual semi-
structured interviews with a small group of volunteer students in December 2012, after they 
had completed the subject. Five female mature age students were interviewed. All 
interviewees were mothers, and two were employed as teachers’ aides at the time of 
interview. Four of the students were in the first year of their degree, and one had almost 
completed two years of her degree.  
Given students’ varied geographical locations, the interviews were conducted by 
telephone and ranged from approximately 30 to 47 minutes in duration. Students were asked 
a range of questions about the learning processes, online pedagogies and assessment tasks 
that they engaged in during the subject. While they were not explicitly asked what they 
learned or acquired (e.g. content, processes, skills, attitudes, values), some of what they had 
learned emerged through the interviews. The interviews were audio recorded and fully 
transcribed, and the transcripts analysed in this study to provide a deeper insight into 
students’ experiences and perceptions of FSE, than provided by the survey alone. While we 
acknowledge that generalisations may not be drawn from such a small sample of students, 
their responses could be interpreted as an indicator of possible typical responses, especially if 
all five interviewees mentioned particular issues. In the reporting of results, the participants 
are identified as Student 1 through to Student 5. 
 
 
Data Analysis 
 
Students’ responses to the rating scales and dichotomous questions of the survey 
(Questions 1-3, and Questions 6-8) were analysed quantitatively using univariate analysis 
(frequencies, percentages and means). The results of this analysis are presented and discussed 
according to our analytical frames: Pittaway’s (2012) elements of engagement (Tab. 1) and 
Herrington and colleagues’ (2001) critical elements of effective online learning environments 
(Tab. 2). A deductive approach was employed to qualitatively analyse students’ free 
responses to Questions 5, 6 and 7 according to elements of one or both of the analytical 
frames, as appropriate. For example, a student’s comment that he/she would have liked the 
provision of additional videos to explain key science concepts more effectively (Question 6) 
would be coded as follows: intellectual engagement (Pittaway, 2012) and resources – 
[PAGE 12]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  89 
purposeful use of media (Herrington et al., 2001). The first and second authors undertook this 
process, discussing and refining their coding of the survey data until they were in agreement. 
Students’ free responses to Question 4 of the survey (i.e. the most effective aspects of 
the subject that supported their learning) and the transcripts from the five student interviews 
were analysed qualitatively using Nvivo 10 (QSR International, 2012). These data were also 
coded according to one or both of the analytical frames, as appropriate, in order to analyse 
students’ perceptions of engagement and learning based on the online subject’s modules, 
resources, scaffolded learning experiences, assessment tasks and support strategies. For 
example, a student’s comment that referred to the opportunity or value of learning something 
new about a local sustainability issue through the sustainability inquiry assessment task 
would be coded as follows: intellectual engagement (Pittaway, 2012) and pedagogies – 
meaningful assessment (Herrington et al., 2001). The coding for this part of the analysis was 
discussed and refined by the first and third authors until they were in agreement. The coded 
data derived from the Nvivo analysis were also used to generate a word cloud (see word 
cloud software, for example, at http://tagcrowd.com/ or http://www.wordle.net/) to provide a 
visual representation of the prominent themes to emerge from the findings and to guide the 
discussion of the results. 
 
 
Findings and Discussion 
 
In the following section, we present the findings of our analyses according to each of 
Pittaway’s (2012) five categories of engagement, and outline students’ perceptions of what 
elements of the subject supported their engagement and learning, drawing upon Herrington et 
al.’s (2001) quality guidelines for online courses. In this way, we seek to illuminate how the 
pedagogies, resources and delivery strategies adopted in FSE shaped students’ personal, 
academic, intellectual, social and professional engagement. Figure 1 presents the word cloud 
highlighting the prominent themes regarding student engagement and learning to emerge 
from the analysis of the open-ended responses of Question 4 of the student survey and the 
interview data. It is broadly evident that ‘intellectual engagement’ (Pittaway, 2012; see Tab. 
1) and ‘authentic tasks’, ‘communication’, ‘clear goals, directions and learning plans’, and 
‘purposeful use of media’ (Herrington et al., 2001; see Tab. 2) are the most prominent themes 
to emerge from students’ perceptions of the subject. We will now present and explore these 
findings, and others, in closer detail. 
 
[PAGE 13]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  90 
 
Figure 1: A word cloud representing the most prominent themes regarding student engagement and 
learning that emerged from the analysis of the coded open-ended responses of the student survey and 
the interview data. 
 
Personal Engagement 
 
Being personally engaged in university study requires an awareness of one’s own 
“expectations, experiences, assumptions, knowledge, skill and dispositions” (Pittaway, 2012, 
p. 42). In the context of a first year subject – when students are transitioning into higher 
education – feeling enabled to successfully undertake university study through accessible and 
inclusive approaches to teaching and learning is critical to student retention and success (Kift, 
2009). When FSE was first conceptualised, a key consideration was providing ‘equivalence 
of experience’ for on-campus and online students. This immediate challenge was driven by 
our university’s Learning, Teaching and Assessment policy which requires that “the design of 
course content and learning experiences across different campuses and/or modes … will 
ensure equivalent opportunity for students to achieve the stated learning outcomes” (JCU, 
2015b).  While we acknowledge that equivalence of experience does not guarantee quality 
provision of online or blended learning, in this case, this requirement provided the impetus to 
think creatively about how all students could be enabled to be successful in the subject 
through a purposeful selection of learning technologies that provide equitable access to 
learning that is participatory and experiential. Equity and accessibility (i.e. ensuring that all 
subject materials and activities are accessible to all students, irrespective of their 
geographical location) are critical elements in the delivery of online courses (Herrington et 
al., 2001). In the context of FSE, equivalence of experience is achieved, in part, by having a 
shared LearnJCU site for all student cohorts to access (noting that the university’s LMS 
automatically generates separate sites for each mode and that a request for a merged site is 
required) (see also, Social engagement).  
Equivalence of experience is also achieved by using a range of learning technologies 
that enable lecturers and tutors to deliver the subject effectively in an online environment (see 
Tab. 4). Online modules and weekly lectures are the primary mode for content delivery. As 
previously discussed, the online modules (hosted by Google Sites™) are framed by an 
inquiry approach that navigates students through the weekly learning by way of a scaffolded 
narrative supported by readings and activities. The modules are linked into LearnJCU for all 
 

[PAGE 14]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  91 
students to access at any time, while the on-campus lectures are video-recorded (‘vodcasted’) 
so that online students can listen to their lecturer’s explanation of the subject matter, watch 
demonstrations and videos, and listen to questions asked during the lecture: 
 
Being an online student I really, really appreciated being able to watch the lectures 
because they videotaped them and then put them online a few days later. I found 
that very helpful for my particular learning style to actually listen to the lecture and 
be able to watch the lecture online. I felt like I was in the classroom as well so it 
proved beneficial for me. (Student 3, emphasis added) 
 
In the student survey, the majority of respondents (92.6%) agreed or strongly agreed 
that the subject materials and online delivery of FSE (including online modules, lecture 
vodcasts, online tutorials and Collaborate™ sessions) enabled them to have an experience of 
the subject comparable to that of on-campus students. As one student explained in the survey, 
“By having lecture vodcasts and online tutorials I felt like I was getting a similar experience 
to that of internal [on-campus] students”. This is significant because providing online 
students with equitable opportunities to achieve the same learning outcomes as their on-
campus peers – particularly in the context of challenging subject content and underprepared 
first-year students – supports their personal engagement by empowering them to be motivated 
and successful learners.  
 
On-campus provision Equivalent online provision 
LearnJCU site hosts all subject materials – accessed by all students 
Online modules hosted by Google Sites™  – accessed by all students 
On-campus lectures Lecture vodcasts 
On-campus tutorials Online tutorials facilitated using wikis 
Additional assessment support provided in lectures 
and tutorials at students’ request 
Real-time assessment support provided via 
Blackboard Collaborate™ (virtual classroom) 
sessions 
Interactive discussion and question-and-answer time 
provided in lectures and tutorials 
Online discussion board, including prompts to use 
the discussion board in online tutorials 
Table 4: A summary of the approaches to on-campus subject delivery employed in FSE and equivalent 
online provisions, facilitated via a range of learning technologies. 
 
On-campus tutorials, in which students engage in hands-on and experiential learning 
activities, extend the concepts examined in the modules and lectures, and model teaching 
strategies for science and sustainability education. For online students, the tutorials are 
facilitated using wikis that, like the online modules, provide a scaffolded narrative that guides 
them through the weekly activities and simple experiments performed with everyday 
materials. The wikis include task instructions, links to resources, model responses and 
opportunities to respond to the activities via a discussion board. 
 
 
Academic Engagement 
 
Academic engagement supports students’ success through the employment of a range of 
academic skills and attributes that they bring to their university studies, and the active 
development of others while they learn (Pittaway, 2012). In a blended learning environment, 
students’ computer literacy skills, including the ability to navigate and engage successfully 
with the online learning environment, is as important to academic success as other academic 
[PAGE 15]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  92 
skills and attributes, such as the ability to read critically, evaluate and synthesise information, 
solve problems and communicate.  
Question 8 of the survey asked students whether they had sufficient ICT skills to 
successfully undertake FSE online. While 25 respondents indicated that they did, two 
students (7.4%) responded in the negative. For instance, one student explained that she did 
not know what a hyperlink was or how to create one – a necessary requirement for the web 
story assessment. While this may not seem like a significant proportion of students, it does 
challenge the assumption that students who enrol in online courses possess the necessary 
computer literacy skills required to complete their studies successfully (cf. Bennett, Maton, & 
Kervin, 2008). Not possessing the necessary skills is likely to impede students’ intellectual 
engagement in online study, as it makes navigating the online learning environment, 
accessing information and completing activities difficult. Furthermore, it is likely to impede 
students’ personal engagement by eroding their confidence in their ability to successfully 
complete their university studies. It is also important to note that even students with advanced 
computer literacy skills benefit from guidance on how to use technologies in learning.  
Aside from computer literacy, FSE explicitly teaches, models and assesses a range of 
other academic literacy skills that are necessary to complete the subject (and first-year 
university studies) successfully, such as written communication and numeracy skills. At 
interview, a student recognised the importance of her own academic engagement, valuing the 
emphasis placed upon the development of academic literacy in FSE, in addition to skills that 
she perceived as essential to future classroom practice: 
 
I think the emphasis upon academic literacy is very valuable … it’s only a first year 
subject so you need to be able to learn from these things ... [assessment] feedback 
[indicated] that referencing across the board was pretty poor … so, covering a whole 
range of different skills from academic literacy to some of the skills that will become 
vital in a classroom environment down the track. (Student 5) 
 
Another interviewee explained how the online modules fostered important academic skills, 
including self-directed learning: 
 
I felt we were encouraged to do the online modules of work, where you had to read, 
answer questions. That was self-directed learning, structured self-directed learning … 
(Student 4) 
 
Indeed, a blended learning approach can introduce opportunities for self-directed, self-paced 
learning (JISC, 2009). Beyond fulfilling ‘content delivery’ requirements of teaching, the 
modules were purposefully designed to create compelling and personally relevant weekly 
learning journeys for students. It is important to note though that six students (22.2%) 
indicated that technical difficulties associated with accessing the learning materials impeded 
their learning in the subject. A reliable and robust interface that is error free in its operation is 
an important consideration in the online environment (Herrington et al., 2001). 
 
 
Intellectual Engagement 
 
Intellectual engagement concerns students’ engagement with the ideas, concepts and 
thinking associated with their chosen discipline. Students who are intellectually engaged ask 
questions, are critical about their own thinking and are open to multiple perspectives 
(Pittaway, 2012). Given that FSE is a first-year subject, it is foundational in the sense that it 
develops a knowledge base for students’ curriculum studies in science and social science 
[PAGE 16]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  93 
education later in their degree. As such, the development, communication and application of 
science and sustainability concepts are important learning outcomes in the subject. 
Achievement of these outcomes is promoted through a purposeful choice of pedagogies and 
enabled through quality resources and media (Herrington et al., 2001). 
As shown in Figure 1, intellectual engagement was the most significant theme to 
emerge from analysis of the student survey and interview data. A number of aspects of FSE 
engaged students intellectually; namely, the nature of the subject matter, the organisation of 
the subject matter (i.e. the modularised structure and the use of an overarching pedagogical 
framework), the assessment tasks, and the purposeful choice of online pedagogies and 
resources that supported students’ learning (i.e. their conceptual understanding, scientific 
literacy and personal actions for sustainability). The findings pertaining to each of these 
aspects are presented below. 
 
 
The Nature of the Subject Matter 
 
It was clear from interview data that the nature of the subject matter explored in FSE 
played a critical role in engaging students intellectually. Students explained that new and 
diverse content and perspectives, which served to enhance their awareness and understanding 
of sustainability and sustainability issues both locally and globally, was engaging:  
 
I really do enjoy the content of this unit. I found it very interesting and there’s a lot of 
things that I didn’t know and I’ve learnt for the first time. (Student 1) 
 
I went to a commercial school when I was in school so we did practical subjects like 
typing, accounting and business economics and stuff like that so I haven’t had a 
science-based schooling. I was really captivated by the subject content. I found it 
really interesting. I learnt heaps about the environment. I knew, but didn’t really want 
to look at the bigger picture. (Student 3) 
 
From a personal perspective, it gave me the opportunity to look at a lot of different 
issues … that previously I haven’t had time or the motivation to do. So, I gained a lot, 
lots and lots of knowledge about the environment, sustainability, about it being more 
than just a piece of land outside, that there is so much more to all of it, to the whole 
subject, and to sustainability. (Student 4) 
 
 
The Organisation of Subject Matter 
 
With regards to engaging students with the key ideas and ways of thinking in science 
and sustainability education, the conceptual organisation of the subject and an overarching 
pedagogical framework were key design considerations. The foci of the six modules 
(Education for Sustainability, Water, Energy, Land, Air and Sustainable Futures) serve as 
conceptual organisers for the key science and sustainability concepts and issues explored in 
the subject. With a view to foster independent learning, the modules themselves are framed 
by an inquiry pedagogical framework that prompts students to explore their prior knowledge, 
learn new knowledge by engaging with the weekly concepts and readings, reflect on and 
synthesise their learning, and consider implications for classroom practice and personal 
sustainability actions. The inquiry framework provides explicit guidance, scaffolding and 
structure, conveying clear expectations to students – as is necessary in the first-year 
experience (Kift, 2009). It also helps to structure clear learning goals and directions 
[PAGE 17]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  94 
(Herrington et al., 2001), which, for the students in our study, was a prominent theme to 
emerge from the data (Fig. 1).  
As shown in Table 5, all students indicated in the survey that the modules effectively 
organised subject content. Approximately 92 per cent of students agreed that the inquiry 
framework was an effective way to organise the weekly learning materials. Thirty-seven per 
cent of respondents (n=10) indicated in Question 4 of the survey that the online modules, 
including their organisation, best supported their learning. As two students explained, the 
modules provided a “structured learning environment” and were “very helpful in developing 
an understanding of the content especially, the way they were structured e.g. drawing on our 
previous knowledge before learning new concepts and sorting out the new knowledge and 
how it can be used in classroom practice”. 
 
Items 
Agree and 
Strongly agree, 
n (%) 
Mean 
The six module organisation (i.e. Education for Sustainability, Water, 
Energy, Land, Air and Sustainable Futures) was an effective way to 
organise subject content 
27 (100.0) 1.3 
The inquiry framework of online modules (Tuning in, Finding out, 
Sorting out, etc.) was an effective way to organise the weekly materials 
25 (92.6) 1.5 
Assessment Task 2 (Sustainability inquiry and web story) provided a 
valuable opportunity to use my imagination and creativity in designing a 
web story 
25 (92.6) 1.6 
Assessment Task 2 (Sustainability inquiry and web story) provided a 
valuable opportunity to consider actions for sustainability 
25 (92.6) 1.6 
Assessment Task 1 (Solar still investigation) was valuable for 
developing my scientific literacy 
26 (96.3) 1.7 
Table 5: A summary of students’ responses regarding the conceptual organisation and assessment tasks 
in FSE (n=27). Mean represents the average score for each item, on a scale of 1 (strongly agree) to 4 
(strongly disagree). 
 
 
Choice of Online Pedagogies and Resources to Support Student Learning 
  
According to Herrington et al. (2001), effective online learning environments use 
technology and media purposefully and appropriately, “according to strengths and 
affordances” (p. 7). The purposeful use of media was a prominent theme to emerge from the 
data, as shown in Figure 1. With regards to the online pedagogies and resources that engaged 
students intellectually, the online modules and lecture vodcasts and accompanying lecture 
notes (in the form of PowerPoint™ slideshows) were most frequently cited by students as 
supporting their understanding of content knowledge, development of scientific literacy and 
personal actions for sustainability (Tab. 6; see Professional engagement for a discussion of 
science and sustainability teaching strategies). Approximately 56 per cent of students (n=15) 
also reported that the hands-on activities and experiments embedded in the online modules, 
which were designed to consolidate students’ disciplinary knowledge, were highly engaging 
(Tab. 7). 
As shown in Table 6, all students who responded to the survey engaged with the 
lecture vodcasts and accompanying notes in the subject. The lecture vodcasts were also cited 
most frequently in Question 4 of the survey (n=12, 44.4%) as being the most effective aspect 
of the subject that supported students’ learning and intellectual engagement because, for 
[PAGE 18]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  95 
example, they “really, really helped in my understanding of the content”. A student explained 
at interview that “being able to watch the lecture online [was] very beneficial because the 
stuff that I had read, my modules that I had worked through by myself, made more sense 
when I listened to the lecture” (Student 3). In this way, bringing students ‘into’ the lecture is 
important to support their personal engagement and learning. Further, unlike face-to-face 
lectures, vodcasts can be paused and replayed as necessary, from any location. Evidence 
suggests that students spend longer with content of pod/vodcasts than that of the scheduled 
lecture by, for example, replaying parts and researching recommended resources or links 
(JISC, 2009). 
 
Aspect of 
learning 
Responses, n (%) 
Online 
modules 
Lecture 
vodcasts and 
accompanying 
PowerPoints™ 
Weekly 
online 
tutorials 
Assessment 
preparation 
sessions 
delivered via 
Collaborate™ 
Additional 
Camtasia™ 
recordings 
Discussion 
board 
Supported 
understanding of 
content 
knowledge 
23 (85.2) 24 (88.9) 16 (59.3) 11 (40.7) 14 (51.9) 13 (48.1) 
Supported 
development of 
scientific literacy 
23 (85.2) 22 (81.5) 17 (63.0) 10 (37.0) 16 (59.3) 12 (44.4) 
Supported 
personal actions 
for sustainability 
23 (85.2) 20 (74.1) 15 (55.6) 9 (33.3) 11 (40.7) 12 (44.4) 
Supported 
development of 
science and 
sustainability 
teaching strategies 
22 (81.5) 21 (77.8) 15 (55.6) 9 (33.3) 10 (37.0) 10 (37.0) 
I didn’t 
participate in this 
aspect of the 
subject 
1 (3.7) 0 2 (7.4) 8 (29.6) 4 (14.8) 1 (3.7) 
Table 6: Students’ views regarding the online pedagogies and resources that supported different aspects 
of their learning in FSE (n=27). The mode for each item is shaded. Students could select more than one 
response in each row. 
 
Students most frequently cited the online modules and lecture vodcasts as supporting 
personal actions for sustainability (Tab. 6). At interview, students explained how studying 
FSE was an “eye-opening” experience that motivated them to consider their own actions for 
sustainability, as well as how to influence those of their family and colleagues: 
 
It has been a real eye opening subject … It has made me more conscious, more aware 
of personal issues, of community issues, and the world as a whole, and the issues that 
the world is facing going forth … It has made me more aware, and I want to share it 
with people at school. I want to turn off the fridge on the weekend, and get the other 
staff that I am working with involved and share what I am learning with them so that 
they can also, especially the teachers, which are more in a position to share and 
motivate the kids, and incorporate some of the things that I am learning in what 
they’re doing. (Student 4) 
 
[PAGE 19]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  96 
It [the subject] has made me think what can I do as one little person on my own or one 
little family, what we can do to make things better.  (Student 3) 
 
Responses to the online tutorials were mixed. While only two survey respondents 
reported that they did not participate in the online tutorials (Tab. 6), five students (18.5%) 
indicated in Question 5 that the tutorials were least effective for their learning. Similarly, the 
majority of students reported that the hands-on activities and experiments embedded in the 
online tutorials were only somewhat engaging (Tab. 7). One student explained that she could 
not complete all of the experiments as she worked through the tutorials at night. For example, 
in one activity, students are required to calculate the carbon content of a tree by measuring 
the circumference and shadow of a tree: “[I] couldn’t do the shadow test [because] I did that 
tute at night!” This student also explained the uncertainty she experienced doing the activities 
on her own: “Getting the resources together to do the experiments then wondering if I had 
done it right was disheartening”. The model tutorial responses provided, however, were 
helpful for this student: “Embedding response data to experiments was valuable”. In this 
case, studying online was an isolating experience that impeded this student’s intellectual and 
personal engagement.  
 
Items 
Responses, n (%) 
Mean Highly 
engaging 
Somewhat 
engaging 
Not engaging 
at all 
1 2 3 
Online modules 15 (55.6) 12 (44.4) 0 1.4 
Weekly online tutorials*  2 (7.7) 20 (76.9) 3 (11.5) 1.8 
Assessment Task 1  
(Solar still investigation) 14 (51.9) 12 (44.4) 1 (3.7) 1.5 
Assessment Task 2  
(Sustainability inquiry and 
web story) 
19 (70.4) 6 (22.2) 2 (7.4) 1.4 
Table 7: Students’ views regarding the extent to which the hands-on activities and experiments 
embedded in particular aspects of FSE were engaging (n=27). The mode for each item is shaded. 
Mean represents the average score for each item, on a scale of 1-3. *n=25. 
 
It can also be seen from Table 6 that approximately 30 per cent of students did not 
participate in the assessment preparation sessions delivered via Blackboard Collaborate™. 
Student feedback indicated that ‘real time’ or synchronous teaching and learning 
opportunities like these are difficult to accommodate given their personal commitments. A 
small number of students did not engage with the Camtasia™ recordings, developed by their 
tutor as ‘additional’ resources to support selected topics relevant to assessment, such as how 
to design a fair test and how to reference their work appropriately. Only one student indicated 
that she did not engage with the discussion board. Perhaps this is not surprising because, 
while optional, it presents the only ongoing opportunity for students to connect with their 
peers in the subject. 
Twenty-one survey respondents (77.8%) indicated that they were satisfied with the 
range of the pedagogies employed and resources provided in FSE (Questions 6 and 7 of the 
survey). Four students offered the following suggestions to better support their intellectual 
engagement with the key concepts in the subject: more YouTube™ clips (“I found some 
YouTube clips on areas where I lacked understanding [that] really helped”); optional 
Collaborate™ sessions each week (“to consolidate weekly information”); and “more 
examples” (presumably of applied concepts). Interestingly, one student indicated that she 
would have preferred that less resources and activities were provided, explaining that it “was 
[PAGE 20]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  97 
a lot to get through per week.  I could only work at night, so for me it was heavy going”. This 
highlights an interesting tension between providing a rich and stimulating online learning 
environment for students and them managing the realities of online study when often time-
poor. 
 
 
The Assessment Tasks 
 
The two key assessment tasks also played an important role in engaging students 
intellectually. Assessment lies arguably at the heart of the learning experience in higher 
education, shaping how learners understand the most valued aspects and intent of the 
curriculum (JISC, 2010). Ninety-six per cent of students surveyed felt that the solar still 
investigation was valuable for developing their scientific literacy (Tab. 5). With regards to 
the sustainability inquiry and web story, 25 respondents (92.6%) felt that this assessment task 
enabled them to use their imagination and creativity, and to consider actions for sustainability 
(Tab. 5). Approximately one-quarter of respondents indicated in Question 4 of the survey that 
the assessment tasks were the most effective aspects of the subject for their learning (n=7, 
25.9%).  
The majority of students also reported high levels of engagement arising from the 
hands-on activities and experiments embedded in the assessment tasks (Tab. 7). Some 
students explained that they found the “hands-on learning” beneficial in the solar still 
investigation, while the place-based nature of the sustainability inquiry and web story was 
valuable as “it bought home the reality of sustainability”. At interview, a student explained 
how playing an active role in completing the assessment engaged her intellectually: 
 
I don’t know if interactive is the right word, but it [the assessment] kind of made you 
get out there and do things, like the solar still assessment, you had to make a solar still 
and watch it and write up about it, and the web story we had to go out there and take 
photographs of our chosen web story and research the sustainable issues around it, so 
it made you get out there and do stuff.  I found being interactive with our assessments 
was beneficial. It made it interesting and not just reading vast amounts of literature 
and regurgitating it in an essay. (Student 3) 
 
 
Social Engagement 
 
For first-year students, social engagement (including social interaction and 
communication, getting to know other students, the development of strong social networks, 
and being part of a learning community) is particularly important for success at university 
(Kift, 2009; Pittaway, 2012). Social engagement also involves the development of positive 
relationships and open communication with university teaching staff. As shown in Figure 1, 
‘communication’ arose as a dominant theme in this study.  
In the student survey, 22 respondents (81.5%) either agreed or strongly agreed that 
they felt part of a community of learners in the FSE online environment (Tab. 8). At the same 
time, it must be recognised though that nearly one-fifth of students surveyed responded in the 
negative to this statement. Opportunities for dialogue with other students and university 
teaching staff are an important part of the delivery of quality online courses (Herrington et 
al., 2001). In FSE, the discussion board is the only tool within the LMS that facilitates 
student-student communication for online students; however, contributions are not 
compulsory or assessed. This was a deliberate choice in the design of the subject, so as not to 
overburden students’ workloads in what is already a rigorous subject. Instead, students are 
[PAGE 21]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  98 
prompted to contribute to the discussion board in the online tutorials to share their learning 
and experiences of the activities, and to ask questions. Three students indicated in the survey 
that the discussion board was least effective for their learning (Question 7). One survey 
respondent, on reflecting on a tutorial activity that was intended to culminate in students 
debating renewable energy on the discussion board, commented that: “I actually debated 
myself as no one else participated.  [I] felt like I was doing the subject alone”. Another 
student explained at interview that contributing to the discussion board was onerous in light 
of the volume of reading that she had to do as an online student, and that she preferred the 
real-time verbal communication that came by way of the Collaborate™ sessions to support 
the assessment: 
 
I am studying externally [online] so I have to read and I have to write an awful lot but 
just the general communication, to also have to sit and write that and then read 
responses, I find really tiring. And it’s like a chore, where being able to verbally just 
listen and talk about things is quick, it’s immediate. That’s what appealed to me. 
(Student 4) 
 
Item 
Agree and 
Strongly agree,  
n (%) 
Disagree and 
Strongly disagree, 
n (%) 
Mean 
There was benefit in sharing the one LearnJCU site 
with all modes of delivery in the subject (on-campus 
and online) 
23 (85.2) 4 (14.8) 1.7 
I felt part of a community of learners in the online 
environment 22 (81.5) 5 (18.5) 1.9 
Table 8: A summary of students’ responses in regards to feeling part of a community of learners and 
accessing a shared LearnJCU site in FSE (n=27). Mean represents the average score for each item, on a 
scale of 1 (strongly agree) to 4 (strongly disagree). 
 
Another opportunity for student–student communication and collaboration comes by 
way of the assessment tasks. For on-campus students, the solar still experiment and the web 
story task is completed in small groups so that students can collaborate on their experimental 
design, and on their inquiry into a local sustainability issue. For external students, working 
collaboratively is optional, acknowledging that not all students will have peers in their own 
geographic location to work with. For one online student who could take up the opportunity, 
collaborating on the assessment tasks was useful for their learning: 
 
With our assessment tasks, we had the opportunity to work in a group, so I was 
working alongside other students, and I think, yeah, that did help me to learn and 
consolidate and talk with other students seeing what they thought or what their 
understanding is with the content. (Student 1) 
 
High levels of student–staff communication are fostered throughout the subject in 
relation to weekly learning and the assessment tasks (e.g. via email, the discussion board, 
announcements on LearnJCU and assessment preparation sessions). While this is reflected in 
consistently high levels of student satisfaction in subject and teaching evaluation surveys 
(administered by the university), it is not clear whether students considered their 
communication with teaching staff when deciding whether they felt part of a community of 
learners. Students did, however, acknowledge the importance of timely communication and 
feedback from teaching staff at interview:  
[PAGE 22]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  99 
 
I think they [the tutor and lecturer] have done a really good job, in like, they’re 
constantly sending out emails and reminders and letting us know when information has 
been posted and I think that’s sort of been a good motivation for myself. (Student 1) 
 
My tutor was outstanding because any questions that anyone had, he would respond to 
very promptly and there was no silly question. It was safe to ask a question. (Student 2) 
 
As discussed earlier, a deliberate decision was made to develop one integrated 
LearnJCU site for all student cohorts in FSE. Aside from contributing to students’ personal 
engagement, there is evidence that this approach also supports their social engagement. 
Although students are not actively required to interact with peers across different modes of 
delivery (on-campus and online), the provision of one LearnJCU site does appear to provide 
students with a sense that they are part of a larger cohort and community of learners. In the 
student survey, 23 respondents (85.2%) felt that there was benefit in sharing the one LMS site 
with all modes of delivery in the subject (Tab. 8).  
 
 
Professional Engagement 
 
Professional engagement involves students engaging with their chosen profession 
during their university study. In the context of our study and Pittaway’s (2012) framework 
(i.e. preservice teacher education), it is about students connecting with teachers, principals, 
schools and other educational contexts; engaging in professional experience; participating in 
professional learning opportunities; and sharing and reflecting on their professional 
experience with other students. We have also extended this category of engagement to 
include the development of a professional identity and the skills and knowledge necessary to 
teach in the classroom. As teacher educators, we understand the importance of modelling and 
engaging students in authentic learning experiences that also can be effectively implemented 
in classrooms. We recognise that “teacher education represents a unique form of teaching in 
which both the content of the teaching and the practice of the teaching form the basis of what 
is being taught” (Edwards, 2010, p. 10).  
Indeed, it is the purposeful choice of authentic pedagogies in FSE that engages 
students professionally (Herrington et al., 2001); see the prominence of ‘authentic tasks’ in 
Figure 1. Through the online modules, lectures, tutorials and assessment tasks, FSE makes 
connections to early childhood and primary curricula and pedagogies for science and 
sustainability education, in order to develop students’ professional identity and competence. 
As shown in Table 9, 89-96 per cent of respondents agreed that the online modules made 
effective links to classroom practice, and that the online tutorials and assessment tasks 
modelled classroom strategies for science and sustainability education effectively. Students 
most frequently cited the online modules and the lecture vodcasts in terms of supporting their 
development of science and sustainability teaching strategies (Tab. 6). 
  
[PAGE 23]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  100 
Item 
Agree and 
Strongly agree, 
n (%) 
Mean 
The assessment tasks (Tasks 1 and 2) effectively modelled classroom 
strategies for science and sustainability education 26 (96.3) 1.7 
The online module activities made effective links to classroom 
practice 26 (96.3) 1.8 
The weekly online tutorials effectively modelled classroom strategies 
for science and sustainability education 24 (88.9) 1.9 
Table 9: A summary of students’ responses regarding whether the online modules, online tutorials and 
assessment tasks in FSE made effective links to classroom practice and effectively modelled classroom 
strategies for science and sustainability education (n=27). Mean represents the average score for each 
item, on a scale of 1 (strongly agree) to 4 (strongly disagree). 
 
Student perceptions of authenticity of assessment tasks and consideration of the 
implications for real-world practice have been shown in the literature to influence student 
learning (Gulikers, Kester, Kirschner, & Bastiaens, 2008). In this study, one student 
explained at interview how the solar still investigation engaged her professionally as a future 
teacher: 
 
Actually doing the experiment and as a prospective teacher going through the process 
of doing a basic experiment and writing it up and going into a little bit of depth was 
quite useful. (Student 2) 
 
Similarly, for another student, the sustainability inquiry and web story was professionally 
engaging as it modelled an authentic pedagogical process: 
 
I think it was a very good exercise for preservice teachers to be able to work on 
developing something that was age appropriate, something that was meaningful in 
terms of being a sustainability issue, something that was informed by the process of 
inquiry and too, I suppose, to have a bit of an idea of what it’s like if you were to be 
able to present it on a real issue in the world around us and to be able to deliver it in 
an educational environment. (Student 5)  
 
This student also explained that the provision of authentic examples of education for 
sustainability by way of case studies was engaging and motivating, and helped her to 
consider her role as a future teacher: 
 
Of interest to me was some of the examples where schools have taken on engaging 
sustainability and garden projects and things like that. Reading about some of the 
different schools, you know, like the ones that were the trial for the Stephanie 
Alexander garden project. Case studies like that. And I suppose for me as I’m starting 
to envisage myself as a teacher … it’s really quite motivating, I suppose, to see that 
on a national scale there are a lot of things that we can learn … The value of seeing a 
case study, the successes, the failures that people have had in the past and being able 
to learn from that to be able to draw from that. (Student 5) 
 
In the context of preservice teacher education, and our own subject, authenticity serves to 
promote learning through “a more challenging content of diverse practices and for diverse 
learners” (Iverson, Lewis, & Talbot, 2007, p. 291).  
[PAGE 24]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  101 
Summary and Conclusions: Implications for Practice 
 
This research sought to investigate the ways a blended learning design can promote 
the development of a robust foundational knowledge base in science and sustainability 
education, and engage first year online university students in active, experiential and praxis-
oriented learning experiences. While this study was conducted in a science and sustainability 
context, we believe its findings are of value to a range of learning areas in teacher education 
that call for quality online and blended learning design.  
In answering the first component of our research question, our findings revealed that 
intellectual engagement was fostered through the provision of online modules that effectively 
organise the subject’s content and structure the weekly learning through an overarching 
inquiry pedagogical frame. Together, these aspects most strongly supported the development 
of students’ foundational knowledge base by supporting them to engage with the learning 
material in a structured way and providing them with clear learning goals and directions. Far 
from privileging knowledge acquisition, student-centred, self-directed engagement with the 
learning material is supported through the explicit scaffolding (cf. Green et al., 2010). Such 
scaffolding is critical in an online environment – and even more so in the context of the first-
year experience for diverse student cohorts. 
The appropriate use of media and the assessment tasks also played a critical role in 
engaging students intellectually and developing their knowledge base. Students frequently 
cited the lecture vodcasts as being important for engaging with the subject’s content. Indeed, 
it was the nature of the subject matter itself that students found stimulating and engaging. 
Intellectual engagement was also fostered through the assessment tasks that support the 
development of students’ scientific literacy, exercise their imagination and creativity, and 
prompt them to consider actions for sustainability. 
In answering the second component of our research question, our findings revealed 
that students engaged in active, experiential and praxis-oriented learning experiences through 
scaffolded hands-on activities and experiments embedded in the online modules and tutorials. 
These aspects were also integral to the assessment task design. Both assessment tasks engage 
students meaningfully with place-based learning by mobilising them in their local 
environment through inquiry. This finding has applicability to other learning areas in teacher 
education that call for active, learner-centred, experiential and praxis-orientated pedagogies 
in an online or blended learning environment, such as the Arts, Technology, and Health and 
Physical Education. A powerful blended learning design can be achieved by using online 
affordances to facilitate students’ learning in their physical environment; for example, by 
thoughtfully selecting experiential activities that students can perform themselves with 
readily accessible materials; by scaffolding and structuring such activities in the LMS so that 
students feel supported and enabled; and by considering how a subject’s assessment tasks can 
offer opportunities to engage meaningfully with their local environment. Although not 
employed in FSE, learning technologies can also encourage students to share their hands-on 
experiences through, for example, video blogs, which themselves become shared artefacts for 
learning. In this way, a blended learning environment can support active, student-centred 
learning approaches, as suggested by Beldarrin (2006) and Fan and Lê (2011). 
Although the online tutorials included opportunities for experiential learning, the 
majority of survey respondents found that these activities were only ‘somewhat engaging’, 
which may be a reflection of the activities’ requirements (e.g. to source materials to complete 
the experiments, or to conduct some activities outdoors). Where possible, the tutorials 
provide secondary data or scenarios if students cannot perform the activities themselves. In 
2014, the first author led a project to develop a suite of short videos to accompany the online 
tutorials that show on-campus students performing the activities and manipulating materials 
and equipment, with a view to support students’ engagement with the tutorials and prevent 
[PAGE 25]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  102 
the “disheartening” experience of wondering whether they have “done it right”, as described 
by one of the survey respondents. These videos will be employed for the first time and 
evaluated when the subject is delivered in 2015. 
In a professional degree like the B.Ed., we found that students valued opportunities 
for praxis-orientated learning, which, in turn, fostered professional engagement as a way to 
develop both their professional identity as teachers, and the skills and knowledge required for 
classroom practice. Authentic tasks emerged as a dominant theme in our study; links to the 
curriculum and classroom strategies for teaching science and sustainability education are 
evidenced in the online modules, the lecture vodcasts and PowerPoint™ slideshows, online 
tutorials and assessment tasks. 
Academic engagement was found to be fostered through the effective use of a range 
of ICTs that enable students’ access to the learning materials, as well as an explicit focus on 
academic skills such as self-directed learning (which can be supported through well-designed 
and scaffolded learning modules). At the same time, we are reminded of the importance of 
understanding the ICT proficiency of our students, as not having adequate skills can impede 
students’ academic, intellectual and personal engagement.  
As students are transitioning into higher education, an enabling learning environment 
that supports personal engagement is critical. We found that providing online students with a 
clear sense that they are receiving a comparable learning experience to that of their on-
campus peers to be important in this context. The need to provide equivalent learning 
opportunities, as required by our university, led us to consider how we might leverage the 
strengths of a range of learning technologies to deliver subject content and experiential 
learning opportunities for all cohorts, through purposeful pedagogical design. In this way, the 
online modules became an integral component of subject delivery for both online and on-
campus students, while learning technologies offer tailored solutions to enable online 
students to access tutorials and lectures. 
With regards to promoting students’ social engagement in the online environment, we 
found that student–staff communication was another prominent theme to emerge in our study, 
as students valued timely feedback and support from teaching staff. In our review of the 
literature regarding what constitutes quality online teacher education, there is broad 
consensus on the value of creating a community of learners that positions students as 
knowledge creators through collaborative, learner-centred pedagogies (Abedin et al., 2010; 
Fasso et al., 2013; Green et al., 2010; Oliveira et al., 2011). It is interesting to note, however, 
as we reflect on the design of FSE, strategies that promote social engagement and the 
development of an online community were not a key consideration. Nonetheless, our findings 
indicate that more than 80 per cent of the students who were surveyed felt part of a learning 
community (Table 8). This raises interesting questions about the extent to which online 
student-student interactions and collaboration are important in a successful blending learning 
design. In FSE, online students predominantly learn individually through carefully scaffolded 
learning experiences, guided inquiry and place-based learning. While engagement and 
learning may be enhanced through greater opportunities for student-student interaction, the 
challenge is to find a balance between an intellectually rigorous and stimulating subject (and 
the associated student workload) and building connections between learners in such a way 
that is not onerous (cf. Student 4, who found the discussion board ‘tiring’). We continue to 
reflect on how to embed purposeful opportunities for online student collaboration as the 
subject evolves, particularly given that building connections between learners is important in 
supporting first-year students’ personal engagement and success. 
Our journey through this research reminds us that promoting student engagement with 
a view to best support learning must be purposefully planned during the subject development 
phase. In this study, Pittaway’s (2012) engagement framework and Herrington et al.’s (2001) 
quality guidelines for online courses offered real utility in reflecting on our instructional 
[PAGE 26]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  103 
design to understand how students engage in the online environment personally, 
academically, intellectually, professionally and socially, and how this is facilitated by our 
choice of pedagogies, resources and delivery strategies. In doing so, we believe that this 
study furthers our understanding of what constitutes quality preservice teacher education in 
an online environment, particularly within the under-researched field of science and 
sustainability education. We encourage other university educators developing or enhancing 
online or blended courses to share their experiences of using quality frameworks to inform 
their instructional design and pedagogical choices, to further the discussion on best practice 
for student engagement and learning across a range of disciplines, particularly those that call 
for place-based and experiential learning. 
 
 
References 
 
Abedin, B., Daneshgar, F., & D’Ambra, J. (2010). Underlying factors of sense of community 
in asynchronous computer supported collaborative learning environments. Journal of 
Online Learning and Teaching, 6(3), 585–596. 
Australian Curriculum Assessment and Reporting Authority. (n.d.). Sustainability. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.australiancurriculum.edu.au/CrossCurriculumPriorities/Sustainability 
Australian Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations. (2009–2011). 
James Cook University Curriculum Refresh project: Australia’s University for the 
Tropics. Diversity and Structural Adjustment Fund, Canberra. 
Baumfield, V., Hall, E., & Wall, K. (2008). Action research in the classroom. London: AGE. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4135/9780857024305 
Beldarrain, Y. (2006).  Distance Education Trends: Integrating new technologies to foster 
student interaction and collaboration. Distance Education, 27(2), 139–153. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01587910600789498 
Bennett, S., Maton, K., & Kervin, L. (2008). The ‘digital natives’ debate: A critical review of 
the evidence. British Journal of Educational Technology, 39(5), 775–786. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8535.2007.00793.x 
Briano, R., Midoro, V., & Trentin, G. (1997). Computer mediated communication and online 
teacher training in environmental education. Journal of Information Technology for 
Teacher Education, 6(2), 127–146. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14759399700200012 
Brinthaupt, T., Fisher, L., Gardner, J., Raffo D., & Woodard, J. (2011). What the best online 
teachers should do. Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 7(4), 515–524. 
Buxton, C. (2010). Social problem solving through science: An approach to critical, place-
based, science teaching and learning. Equity and Excellence in Education, 43(1), 120–
135. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10665680903408932 
Department of Industry, Innovation, Science, Research and Tertiary Education. (2011). 
Higher Education Standards Framework (Threshold Standards). Version 1. Retrieved 
from http://www.comlaw.gov.au/Details/F2013L00194 
Dettmer, P. (2006). New Blooms in established fields: Four domains of learning and doing. 
Roeper Review, 28(2), 70–78. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02783190609554341 
Edwards, S. (2010). Teaching through assessment: The merging of technology and 
assessment in teacher education learning contexts. In D. Gronn, & G. Romeo (Eds.), 
ACEC2010: Digital Diversity. Conference Proceedings of the Australian Computers 
in Education Conference 2010, Melbourne, 6–9 April. Carlton, Victoria: Australian 
Council for Computers in Education. 
[PAGE 27]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  104 
Fan, S. & Lê, Q. (2011).  Developing a Valid and Reliable Instrument to Evaluate Users’ 
Perception of Web-Based Learning in an Australian University Context. Journal of 
Online Learning and Teaching, 7(3), 366–379. 
Fasso, W., Knight, C., & Knight, B. (2013). A design framework for enhancing on-line 
learning. In C. Boyle (Ed.), Student Learning: improving practice. Education in a 
Competitive and Globalizing World (pp. 59-77). New York, NY: Nova Science 
Publishers. 
Fien, J. & Maclean, R. (2000). Teacher education for sustainability: Two teacher education 
projects from Asia and the Pacific. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 
9(1), 83-94. http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1009420923692 
Flutter, J., & Rudduck, J. (2004). Consulting pupils: What’s in it for schools? London: 
RoutledgeFalmer. 
Green, M. (2012). Place, sustainability and literacy in environmental education: Frameworks 
for teaching and learning. Review of International Geographical Education Online, 
2(3), 327-346. 
Green, N., Edwards, H., Wolodko, B., Stewart, C., Brooks, M., & Littledyke, R. (2010). 
Reconceptualising higher education pedagogy in online learning. Distance Education, 
31(3), 257–273. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01587919.2010.513951 
Gulikers, J., Kester, L., Kirschner, P., & Bastiaens, T. (2008). The effect of practical 
experience on perceptions of assessment authenticity, study approach, and learning 
outcomes. Learning and Instruction, 18(2), 172-
186.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2007.02.012 
Hamston, J., & Murdoch, K. (1996). Integrating socially: Planning units of work for social 
education. Melbourne, Australia: Eleanor Curtin. 
Herrington, A., Herrington, J., Oliver, R., Stoney, S., & Willis, J. (2001). Quality guidelines 
for online courses: The development of an instrument to audit online units. In G. 
Kennedy, M. Keppell, C. McNaught & T. Petrovic (Eds.) Meeting at the crossroads: 
Proceedings of ASCILITE 2001 (pp. 263-270). Melbourne: The University of 
Melbourne. 
Hong, H. Y., & Sullivan, F. R. (2009). Towards an idea-centered, principle-based design 
approach to support learning as knowledge creation. Educational Technology 
Research and Development, 57(5), 613-627. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11423-009-
9122-0 
Iverson, H., Lewis, M., & Talbot, R. (2007). Building a framework for determining the 
authenticity of instructional tasks within teacher education programs. Teaching and 
Teacher Education, 24, 290-302. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2007.09.003 
James Cook University. (2014). Access, participation and success plan, 2015-2017. Division 
of Academic and Student Life. Internal document. 
James Cook University. (2015a). ED1411 – Foundations of Sustainability in Education. 
Retrieved from https://secure.jcu.edu.au/app/studyfinder/?subject=ed1411  
James Cook University. (2015b). Learning, Teaching and Assessment Policy. Retrieved from 
http://www.jcu.edu.au/policy/allitoz/JCU_076643.html 
Jefferies, A. & Hyde, R. (2010). Building the future students’ blended learning experiences 
from current research findings.  Electronic Journal of e-Learning 8(2), 133–140. 
Jenkins, E. (2006). The student voice and school science education. Studies in Science 
Education, 42(1), 49-88. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03057260608560220 
JISC. (2009). Effective practice in a digital age: A guide to technology-enhanced learning 
and teaching. Higher Education Funding Council for England. Retrieved from 
http://www.webarchive.org.uk/wayback/archive/20140615094835/http://www.jisc.ac.
uk/media/documents/publications/effectivepracticedigitalage.pdf 
[PAGE 28]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  105 
JISC. (2010). Effective assessment in a digital age: A guide to technology-enhanced 
assessment and feedback. Higher Education Funding Council for England. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.webarchive.org.uk/wayback/archive/20140614115719/http://www.jisc.ac.
uk/media/documents/programmes/elearning/digiassass_eada.pdf  
Johnson, L., Adams Becker, S., Estrada, V., Freeman, A. (2014). NMC Horizon Report: 2014 
Higher Education Edition. Austin, Texas: The New Media Consortium. 
Kawka, M. & Larkin, K. (2011). Wrestling and wrangling with a worrisome wiki: An 
account of pedagogical change in the use of a Web 2.0 technology in a first year 
education course. Studies in Learning, Evaluation, Innovation and Development, 8(1), 
38–48.  
Kennedy, G., Dalgarno, B., Bennett, S., Judd, T., Gray, K., & Chang, R. (2008). Immigrants 
and natives: Investigating differences between staff and students’ use of technology. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.ascilite.org.au/conferences/melbourne08/procs/kennedy.pdf 
Keppell, M. (2010). Redesigning curricula using blended learning: A development-based 
research approach (pp. 217-227). In J. Higgs, D. Fish, I. Goulter, S. Loftus & J. Reid: 
Education for Future Practice. Sense Publishers: The Netherlands. 
Keppell, M., & Riddle, M. (2011). Distributed learning places: Physical, blended and virtual 
learning spaces in higher education. In Physical and Virtual Learning Spaces in 
Higher Education: Concepts for the Modern Learning Environment (pp. 1-20). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Publishing (IGI Global). 
Kift, S. (2009). Articulating a transition pedagogy to scaffold and to enhance the first year 
student learning experience in Australian higher education: Final Report for ALTC 
Senior Fellowship Program. Retrieved January 23, 2015, from: 
http://fyhe.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/Kift-Sally-ALTC-Senior-Fellowship-
Report-Sep-092.pdf  
Knight, E., & Gandomi, N. (2010). Participatory Media for Education: Driving Student-
Centred Learning. Paper presented at the meeting of the Illinois Digital Environment 
for Access to Learning and Scholarship. Retrieved January 23, 2013 from: 
https://www.ideals.illinois.edu/handle/2142/15056  
Koschmann, T., Kelson, A., Feltovich, P., & Barrows, H. (1996). Computer-supported 
problem-based learning: A Principled approach to the use of computers in 
collaborative learning. In T. Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an 
emerging paradigm (pp. 83-119). New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Lasen, M., Tomas, L., Whitehouse, H., Sorin, R., Evans, N., & Stevenson, B. (2015). A case 
study of an Australian university embedding EfS in a pre-service teaching program. In 
S.K. Stratton, R. Hagevik, A. Feldman, & M. Bloom, (eds.), Educating Science 
Teachers for Sustainability (pp. 323-346). ASTE Series in Science Education. 
Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
16411-3_17 
Morse, P. (2000). Education and understanding science and the Earth system for long-term 
sustainability. In K. Wheeler, & A. Perraca Bijur (Eds.), Education for a sustainable 
future: A paradigm of hope for the 21st century (pp. 113-122). New York: Kluwer 
Academic. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-4277-3_8 
Norton, A. (2013). Mapping Australian higher education. Carlton, VIC: Grattan Institute. 
Oliveira, I., Tinoca, L., & Pereira, A. (2011). Online group work patterns: How to promote a 
successful collaboration. Computers & Education, 57, 1348–1357. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2011.01.017 
Oravec, J. (2002). Bookmarking the World: Weblog Applications in Education. Journal of 
Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 45(7), 616–621. 
[PAGE 29]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  106 
Parsell, M. (2014). Standards for Online Education (SOE). Final Report. Sydney: Office for 
Learning and Teaching. 
Peavey, F. (1994). By Life’s Grace: Musings on the Essence of Social Change. Philadelphia: 
New Society Publishers. 
Pittaway, S. (2012). Student and staff engagement: Developing an engagement framework in 
a Faculty of Education. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 37(4), 37–45. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.14221/ajte.2012v37n4.8 
Pombo, L., Smith, M., Abelha, M., Caixinha, H., & Costa, N. (2012). Evaluating an online e-
module for Portuguese primary teachers: trainees’ perceptions. Technology, Pedagogy 
and Education, 21(1), 21-36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1475939X.2011.589156 
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants. On the Horizon – MCB University 
Press, 9(5), 6.  
QSR International. (2012). NVivo (Version 10) [qualitative data analysis software]. 
Doncaster, Australia: QSR International. Retrieved from 
http://www.qsrinternational.com 
Reeves, T., Herrington, J. & Oliver, R. (2005). Design Research: A Socially Responsible 
Approach to Instructional Technology Research in Higher Education. Journal of 
Computing in Higher Education, 16(2), 96-
115.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02961476 
Saeed, N., Yang, Y., & Sinnappan, S. (2009). Emerging Web Technologies in Higher 
Education: A Case of Incorporating Blogs, Podcasts and Social Bookmarks in a Web 
Programming Course Based on Students’ Learning Styles and Technology 
Preferences. Educational Technology & Society, 12(4), 98-109. 
Salyers, V., Carter, L., Barrett, P., & Williams, L. (2010). Evaluating student and faculty 
satisfaction with a pedagogical framework. Journal of Distance Education, 24(3).  
Retrieved from http://www.jofde.ca/index.php/jde/article/viewArticle/695/1169  
Semken, S., & Freeman, C. (2008). Sense of place in the practice and assessment of place-
based science teaching. Science Education, 92(6), 1042-1057. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sce.20279http://dx.doi.org/10.14221/ajte.2014v39n1.3 
Simon, S. (2002). Participatory online environmental education at the Open University, UK. 
In W. Filho (Ed.), Teaching sustainability: Towards curriculum greening (Chapter 7). 
Bern: Peter Lang. 
Simoncini, K., Lasen, M., & Rocco, S. (2014). Professional dialogue, reflective practice and 
teacher research: Engaging early childhood pre-service teachers in collegial dialogue 
about curriculum innovation. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 39(1), 27-44. 
Sinha, N., Khreisat, L., & Sharma, K. (2009). Leaner-interface interaction for technology-
enhanced active learning. Innovate: Journal of Online Education, 5(3), 3. 
Smith, G., & Sobel, D. (2010). Place- and community-based education in schools. New 
York: Routledge. 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation. (2010). Strategic 
questioning. Teaching and learning for a sustainable future: A multimedia teacher 
education programme. Retrieved from 
http://www.unesco.org/education/tlsf/mods/theme_a/mod01.html?panel=4#top  
Wals, A.E.J., & Jickling, B. (2002). “Sustainability” in higher education: From doublethink 
and newspeak to critical thinking and meaningful learning. International Journal of 
Sustainability in Higher Education, 3(3), 221-232. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/14676370210434688 
Whitehouse, H. (2008). “EE in cyberspace, why not?” Teaching, learning and researching 
tertiary pre-service and in-service teacher environmental education online. Australian 
Journal of Environmental Education, 24, 11–21. 
[PAGE 30]
Australian Journal of Teacher Education 
 Vol 40, 11, November 2015  107 
Williams, J. & Jacobs, J. (2004). Exploring the use of blogs as learning spaces in the higher 
education sector. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 20(2), 232-247. 
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case Study Research: Design and Methods. 4th Edition. California: Sage 
Publications. 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
The authors acknowledge that a James Cook University  Teaching and Learning Academy 
Fellowship funded the research reported in this paper.
