[PAGE 1]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 54 
 
 
 
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1) 
Copyright © North American Association for Environmental Education  
ISSN:  2331-0464 (online) 
 
 
Children as “Solutionaries”:  
Environmental Education as an Opportunity to Take Action 
 
Elizabeth O. Crawford 
University of North Carolina Wilmington 
 
Nancy Luke 
Western Carolina University 
 
William Van Pelt 
HeartGift, Austin, Texas 
 
Submitted October 3, 2014; accepted September 30, 2015 
 
Abstract 
 
“Do Y ou Want Paper or Plastic ?” An Inquiry into Single -Use Grocery Bags is an inquiry -based, solutions -focused 
environmental education unit developed for the U.S. Fund for UNICEF. Field -tested in two U.S. southeastern 
regions, the unit enga ges students as informed change makers  who investigate the production, consumption, and 
disposal of single -use, disposable grocery bags. Based upon their inquiries, students become empowered as 
“solutionaries,” or individuals who plan and implement action steps that lead to a sustainable futur e. Results from 
the curriculum pilot offer support for the importance of interdisciplinary environmental education in the 
elementary setting. 
 
Keywords: curriculum, inquiry, environmental sustainability, plastic pollution, global citizenship, STEM  
 
CURRICULUM OVERVIEW 
 
Using large format photography , “Plastic Bags ” by artist Chris Jordan (2007) (see Figure 1 ) depicts our mass 
consumption of single -use bags  - 60,000 every five seconds in the U.S. alone . Statistics like these pertain to the 
study of everyday “stuff,” including how a product is made, who invented it, the raw materials used, why and how 
it changes over time, and whether there is a more sustainable process to meet our human wants and needs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1:  Chris Jordan’s (2007) “Plastic Bags1” 
                                                        
1 This is for online journal use, one issue only. For any subsequent uses, permission must be obtained. Credit: Photo by Chris 
Jordan, www.chrisjordan.com.  

[PAGE 2]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 55 
 
 
A Framework for K -12 Science Education  (National Research Council , 2012) reinforces the interrelated nature of 
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and inspires learners to create solutions to 21st century 
global challenges. Engaging in scientific inquiry about the materials economy fosters learning in all three 
dimensions of the NRC framework : (a) practices (scientist behaviors); (b) crosscutting concepts (those that are 
transdisciplinary and apply to all domains of science); and (c) disciplinary core ideas  (key ideas that focus learning 
and investigation in the physical, life, and earth space  sciences, as well as engineering, technology, and 
applications of science) . Specifically, students analyze cause and effect relationships in interdependent local and 
global systems, gather and analyze data, use technology in authentic ways,  and explore the design and 
development of solutions to problems . As students weigh the intended (and often unintended) effects of 
innovations like single -use, disposable grocery bags, they conclude there is no “best” solution, but rather many 
solutions to solve complex, global issues.   
 
This article details the design and field -testing of an inquiry -based, solutions -focused environmental curriculum 
unit entitled “ Do You Want Paper or Plastic ? An Inquiry into Single -Use, Disposable Grocery Bags. ”  Developed on 
behalf of TeachUNICEF , the Education Division of the U.S. Fund for UNICEF,  this unit addresses UN Millennium 
Development Goal (MDG) #7 Ensure Environmental Sustainability  (United Nations, n.d.).  Importantly, “Do You 
Want Paper or Plastic ?” affords “opportunities for young learners to engage in exercises of ecological citizenship,” 
says Dr. Jay Shuttleworth, a scholar of environmental sustainability at Teachers College, Columbia University.  He 
continues: 
 
This carefully considered curriculum links being informed about sustainable living with matters of 
civic responsibility. Through potentially existential inquiries about where consumer goods “come 
from” and discarded items “go,” this curriculum also creates  the potential for students to 
recognize the interconnectedness of the natural world. Most importantly, the lessons may lead 
participants-- with minimal prodding from the teacher -- to conclude that the answer to “paper or 
plastic?” may be derived from a di fferent source altogether (like, “I brought my own bags.”).  
Thus, the instructional objective of students as “solutionaries” offers possibilities to challenge 
assumptions about consumer habits, and as a result, forge new paths of understanding and 
action-taking. (J. Shuttleworth, personal communication, June 24, 2015). 
 
Informal science educator and doctoral candidate at the University of Maryland College Park, Emily Hestness, 
agrees. “Do You Want Paper or Plastic ?” helps to meet the “growing need for curricular materials that help 
educators to foster the competencies, knowledge, dispositions, and actions necessary for en vironmentally literate 
citizens (E. Hestness, personal communication, June 24, 2015). It also easily connects to existing curriculum 
standards (e.g., Common Core State Standards, Next Generation Science Standards), says Dr. Scott Morrison, 
Assistant Professor at Elon University with a specialization in environmental and ecological studies (S. Morrison, 
personal communication, June 29, 2015). 
 
Intentionally flexible in design, “Do You Want Paper or Plastic ?” is adaptable to diverse early and elementary 
grades and contexts, as teachers consider students’ prior knowledge, experiences, and interests in exploring 
sustainability issues and possible solutions to resolve them. The focus on student inquiry is key, as it “ allows 
teachers to adjust lessons based on student knowledge, ability, and interest ” (S. Morrison, personal 
communication, June 29, 2015). Further, the content is relevant to t he lives of students. Morrison 
continues:  “[Students] all consume products and participate in what Annie Leonard calls ‘the materials 
economy.’  What they see, use, and throw away everyday becomes part of the curriculum.”   
[PAGE 3]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 56 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Photograph of beach plastic on a Taiwanese shore (Terry, 2014). 
 
Finally, although  “Do You Want Paper or Plastic ?” focuses on one specific issue, the inquiry design allows the 
content to be easily substituted. Hestness explains, “[this resource’s] approach may be applied to the investigation 
and analysis of myriad environmental issues of personal rel evance and interest to learners” (E. Hestness, personal 
communication, June 24, 2015).  Morrison concurs, adding “ the inquiry-based structure is a model  for other units 
on sustainability, so the use of the guide extends beyond the paper and plastic bag issue” (S. Morrison, personal 
communication, June 29, 2015). 
 
RATIONALE 
 
As children develop as learners and thinkers from birth through high school, it is their teachers (including parents) 
who help shape their understanding of the world directly around them and, by extension, the world as a whole. 
This understanding is multifaceted and includes understandings related to the natural world  and the interaction 
between humankind and the environment (Duhn, 2012; Pearson & Degotardi, 2009). It is important, as 
Christenson (2004) notes, for teachers to help young children develop critical thinking about their world by 
teaching them that human in teractions and decisions that impact the environment are made for both diverse and 
complex reasons. By examining and understanding these cause and effect relationships, children can develop the 
ability to make more informed and deeply considered decisions , not only about the environment but , how they 
view and interact with the choices that others make.  Christenson further states that for young children 
“environmental education (EE) must also help develop the social knowledge and critical thinking skills th at are 
necessary for examining diverse viewpoints on environmental issues” (p. 3).  
 
While many early childhood and elementary teachers affirm the need to teach EE, some are reluctant to do so for 
a variety of reasons including concerns with covering potent ially controversial content, frightening students with 
exploration of destructive human or natural events, or potentially upsetting parents (Christenson, 2004; Duhn, 
2012). “Too many teachers leave students feeling helpless in the face of environmental destruction,” explains 
Morrison (S. Morrison, personal communication, June 29, 2015).  Research supports this notion. As Özsoy and Ahi 
(2014) studied the drawings of elementary c hildren depicting the current and future state of the environment, for 
example, they found that children’s perceptions ranged from hopeful to bleak. What may be inferred from these 
findings and from others ( e.g., Davis, 2009) is that young children have a beginning context for understanding and 
representing the environment yet there is also a need to help children engage in exploration and inquiry so that 
they may more deeply comprehend environmental issues such as sustainability, recycling, and social acti on.  
Instead of overwhelming students, “Do You Want Paper or Plastic? ” is designed to empower students to consider 
the positive differences they can make.  
 

[PAGE 4]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 57 
 
 
The need to address EE using effective and innovative approaches is  indeed reflected throughout the world (Conde 
& Sanchez, 2009; Dimopoulos, Paraskevopoulos, & Pantis, 2009; Sagy & Tal, 2015) as schools, teachers, and 
educational systems turn their focus to developing and implementing meaningful and authentic integrated units o f 
study to address topics related to exploring, understanding, and caring for our global resources and environment. 
Dimopoulos, Paraskevopoulos, and  Pantis (2009) field-tested a module for young children that focused on 
endangered species in protected area s with positive results affirming the use of this model for future EE units of 
study. Sagy and  Tal (2015) presented a landscape view of EE in Israel’s schools looking at both historical and 
current practices and encouraging increased commitment from system s and teachers to integrate environmental 
education in the curriculum. 
 
Further, Conde and Sanchez (2010) investigated the influence, effectiveness and efficiency of environmental 
education using an eco -audit approach in 13 primary and pre -primary Spanish schools. Their findings gathered via 
participatory action research methodology indicated progress in successful integration of EE but also the need for 
further research into the "treatment of the content, the preparation of materials, [and] the motivation and habits 
and attitudes of the pupils" (p. 491).  Additionally, conducting research on the potential of EE curricula to positively 
impact the hearts and minds of young learners with regard to the environment is specifically needed. Research 
studies of thi s kind are gradually increasing , but as Hardy (2011) asserts, there is a continued need for empirical 
and robust testing of EE curricula's effectiveness in "cultivating responsible environmental behavior and other 
components of environmental literacy (knowledge, affect, and skills)" (p.1). 
 
In another study, Forbes and Zint (2010) found that certain elements must be in place for elementary teachers to 
strengthen and develop their beliefs about and practices related to the power of inquiry to support childre n's 
learning about the environment. One of these factors was access to appropriate and meaningful EE curriculum 
materials. While there exist many curricula that address topics inherent in EE , such as sustainability and social 
action, what makes “Do You Want Paper or Plastic? ” unique and  particularly helpful for teachers of early and 
elementary learners  is the natural integration of many essential ideas and practices that incorporate multiple 
subject areas.  While other curricula may include some importan t knowledge, skills, and dispositions related to 
current educational practice, including EE, this unit seeks to inclusively weave together essential 21 st century skills 
(Partnership for 21st Century Skills, 2009) including: inquiry (e.g. , research processe s, critical thinking, 
collaboration, and problem solving); multimodal, environmental, and global literacy; environmental awareness of 
the interdependence of all living things; and the authentic and developmentally appropriate use of technology to 
represent knowledge and understanding.  
 
Resources were indeed purposefully selected in the development of “ Do You Want Paper or Plastic? ” As 
Christenson (2004) found in her action research with fellow elementary teachers , using quality children’s literature 
was an effective strategy in teaching multiple perspectives and critical thinking about the environment including 
issues such as recycling. “Do You Want Paper or Plastic ?” includes high quality children’s literature thr oughout to 
scaffold students’ ability to take multiple perspectives and their understanding of concepts related to the materials 
economy and the positive and negative effects of innovations on humans, animals, and the environment, as 
highlighted in Table 1 (see next page). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[PAGE 5]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 58 
 
 
Table 1 
Sample Descriptions and Applications of Children’s Literature in “Do You Want Paper or Plastic”? 
 
 
Book Title 
 
Brief Description and Application 
 
 
Browne, A. (1998). Voices in the park. 
New York: DK Publishing. 
 
The same story is told from four different perspectives illustrating to the 
reader that there is more than just one way to interpret an event, 
situation, or setting. Students can discuss and write about examples from 
their own lives in which they saw multi ple perspectives at play. Younger 
children can explore and share the differences between fact and opinion 
and accept that they may differ from their peers in how they feel or think 
about a particular situation or idea related to the environment.   
 
Claybourne, A. (2007). The story of 
inventions. Tulsa, OK: EDC Publishing. 
 
The history and impact of a variety of inve ntions (e.g. spectacles, jeans, 
computers) is described with a unifying theme that innovation has an 
effect on our society and the way we live.   Students can research other 
inventions as part of their inquiry and can also brainstorm and discuss 
inventions that have impacted their lives and the world around them. 
Younger children can collaboratively create a class picture book choosing 
and drawing an invention and then listing one way it helps them and one 
way it may negatively affect their life or their environment.  
 
Deedy, C.A., & Seeley, L. L. (1994). 
Agatha’s feather bed: Not just 
another wild goose story. Atlanta: 
Peachtree Publishers. 
 
 
 
In this children’s book the theme of “ Everything comes from something, / 
Nothing comes from nothing ” is reinforced in an engaging and humorous 
story. Teachers can use this book as a springboard for a discussion on 
renewable or non -renewable resources. For yo unger children, photos of 
renewable and non -renewable resources can be sorted as part of a 
learning station or guided small group activity.  
  
 
In addition to understanding and engaging in inquiry about the environment, children should also examine and 
discover ways to take action for making their world a healthier and more sustainable place (Locke, 2009). Through 
investigating case studies of pra ctices and attitudes toward consumption among elementary Dutch children, 
Kopnina (2013) found that some students, particularly those of lower socioeconomic status, "exhibited less 
awareness of environmental impact of consumption and less belief in their ow n agency in bringing about positive 
change" (p. 131) while others were able to "perceive the link between (over) consumption and [the] environment" 
(p. 133). The variability of these results may indicate a need for focused early childhood and elementary cu rriculum 
that encourages not only awareness but also support for students to make changes in their individual behavior as 
well as take social action to improve the environment. Strong environmental education curricula that are cross -
disciplinary as well as  socially conscious can be supported by children’s literature as stated above (Christenson, 
2004), as well as by the innovative uses of digital technologies (Willis, Weiser, & Kirkwood, 2014). In each lesson, 
“Do You Want Paper or Plastic ?” offers sample t echnology applications for use by teachers and students, as 
appropriate based on students’ ages and context. Sample digital resources and their possible applications are 
detailed in Table 2. 
 
 
 
[PAGE 6]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 59 
 
 
Table 2 
Sample Descriptions and Applications of Digital Resources in “Do You Want Paper or Plastic”? 
 
 
Digital Resource 
 
Brief Description and Application 
 
 
Animoto: Video creation 
(https://animoto.com/) 
 
Children can upload images and add captions, audio narration, and music to 
create an online video that shows what they have learned as a result of their 
inquiry and/or to support ways in which they “take action”. 
 
Delicious: Social bookmarking 
(https://delicious.com/) 
 
Teachers and students can collaboratively store and publically access web 
sites that guide and support their inquiry in one online location. Links can 
also be categorized and annotated based on topics related to their study of 
sustainability and the environment.  
 
Glogster: Online posters 
(http://edu.glogster.com/) 
 
This tool supports students to create digital, interactive posters on a website 
that specifically targets K -12 classrooms. Children can embed and link to 
text, images, audio and video files to represent content, ideas, and 
perspectives related to their research. 
 
Padlet: Wonder Wall online 
(https://padlet.com/)  
 
Collections of student questions or “wonderings” as they begin and 
throughout the unit can be posted and collected either publically or behind 
password protection on this digital board.  The web link to students’ 
questions can also be shared with parents. 
 
Lastly, Davis (2009) asserts the need for more research related to environmental education and early childhood 
including investigat ing the effectiveness of multidisciplinary and social action oriented curricula, “exemplars of 
practice” (p. 235) such as the field-tested unit of curriculum described in this article. 
 
THE CURRICULUM 
 
“Do You Want Paper or Plastic ?” includes six lesson plans with recommended extension activities. Scaffolded using 
Kath Mu rdoch’s (1998) inquiry model , students learn about the origin of common goods, the effects of 
consumption on living things and the environment, and why governing bodies worldwide have im posed 
restrictions on single -use plastic bags. The unit follows the philosophy of solutionary education, defined by the 
Institute for Humane Education (n.d.) as: 
 
Someone who identifies inhumane, unsustainable, and exploitative systems and then develops 
practical, effective, and visionary solutions, both large and small, to replace them with those that 
are restorative, healthy, and just. Solutionaries bring their knowledge  and skills to bear on 
pressing and entrenched challenges in an effort to create positive changes for all people, animals 
and the earth. (paras. 1-2) 
 
Making informed decisions regarding consumption habits is deemed a civic responsibility and aims to empow er 
children as individuals who plan and implement action steps that lead to a sustainable future. This unit outlines 
how educators may implement inquiry -based teaching and learning about the specific issue of single -use, 
[PAGE 7]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 60 
 
 
disposable grocery bags; however, any material good and its related environmental and human health issues can 
be researched, analyzed, and acted upon by students. 
 
First, we developed a curriculum framework stru ctured around the Murdoch inquiry  model, outlining broa d, open-
ended questions and enduring understandings, or transferable “big ideas.” Afterwards, we created topic -specific 
questions related to the specific issue of single-use grocery bags (Table 3 ). While the sequence of these questions is 
intentional and guide students’ investigations and decision-making, they also afford flexibility. The unit neither intends 
to answer questions for students nor to instruct them how to develop solutions to the issues presented. Students are 
encouraged to delve deeply into the problems,  to draw their own conclusions, and to make decisions regarding  how 
they may be “solutionaries”. 
 
Table 3 
“Do You Want Paper or Plastic?” Curriculum Framework 
 
 
Lesson  
 
Enduring Understanding 
 
Overarching Questions 
 
Topical Questions 
 
Lesson 1: “Tuning 
In” to Consumption 
 
The goods we purchase are made 
from limited natural resources; 
therefore, we must make 
informed, thoughtful choices as 
consumers. 
 
Where do the goods come 
from? How are goods 
produced and distributed? 
 
What are paper and plastic bags 
made from?  How are they 
produced?  How are bags 
distributed to local grocery stores? 
Lesson 2: “Finding 
Out” about Human 
Innovation 
Scientific discoveries and 
technological innovations affect 
the way society functions. These 
changes may result in predictable 
/unpredictable, positive / negative 
effects on living things and the 
environment. 
How do advancements in 
science and technology 
affect society? 
What led to the production of 
paper and plastic bags?  
How have they evolved over time 
and why? What are the perceived 
benefits and drawbacks of paper 
and plastic bags to society?  
Lesson 3: “Sorting 
Out” Diverse 
Perspectives 
People have diverse perspectives 
that may explain the behaviors of 
individuals and groups. Sometimes 
these different points of view lead 
to conflict. 
What does it mean to have 
a perspective or point of 
view? How does one’s 
perspective affect or 
influence one’s behaviors? 
 
What perspectives do stakeholder 
groups have regarding the 
production, consumption, and 
disposal of paper and plastic bags? 
Lesson 4:  
“Going Further”: 
Local to Global Bag 
Politics 
Governing bodies affect the 
choices or decisions we make as 
consumers through the 
implementation of laws and 
policies.  
What is the role of the 
government in regulating 
the production, distribution, 
consumption, and disposal 
of products? 
What local, national, and 
international laws and policies 
have been passed regarding paper 
and plastic bags? 
Lesson 5: Making 
Conclusions, Making 
Informed Choices 
Being an informed citizen is a civic 
responsibility. 
 
What are the effects of 
consumerism on humans, 
other living creatures, and 
the environment? 
What happens when paper and 
plastic are thrown away? Where is 
“away”? What are the effects of 
disposal? 
Lesson 6:  
“Solutionaries” 
Taking Action 
An individual’s choices and 
actions can have a positive impact 
on others and the environment. 
Anyone can be a “solutionary”! 
 
How can individuals, groups, 
and nations work together 
to solve problems? 
In what ways can I make positive 
choices regarding consumption 
of goods to lessen my impact on 
the local environment and the 
entire planet?   
 
[PAGE 8]
CHILDREN AS “SOLUTIONARIES” 
 
 
 
61 
The Inquiry Model 
 
Each lesson plan includes two parts. Part I builds interdisciplinary background knowledge. Part II outlines the 
teacher’s facilitation of the inquiry model that we made into a student-friendly poster to be displayed in the 
classroom (Figure 3 ). Subsequent sections of this paper describe each stage and its relationship to the content 
under study . Reflective of the unit’s flexible design, the teacher may determine students have ad equate prior 
knowledge and skills addressed in Part I and proceed to Part II.  Within each lesson, a variety of resources are 
provided, including sample children’s literature and technology tools for teaching and learning, as explained 
previously. 
 
Field-Testing the Inquiry 
 
We field-tested the unit in six third -grade classrooms located in two regions: coastal Georgia and western North 
Carolina. The classroom teachers taught the lessons and were asked to provide written feedback regarding their 
effectiveness, as well as to suggest improvements. Each student maintained an inquiry journal and completed 
authentic projects, offering insights about their mastery of the unit goals and objectives.  
 
 
Figure 3. Kath Murdoch inquiry cycle. 

[PAGE 9]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 62 
 
 
 
 
 
Pre-Assessment: Causes and Effects of Environmental Issues 
 
Prior to beginning the unit, each student completed a pre -assessment table of knowledge and perceptions in his or 
her inquiry journal. During the pilot, it was evident that most third graders understood cause and effect  
relationships and could identify specific examples that related to human -environment interactions. This allowed 
teachers to begin Lesson 1 without introducing or reviewing this overarching concept as it is woven throughout the 
unit. Table 4 highlights a c ompilation of written responses from both regions. (Note: To maintain the integrity of 
the students’ original voices, their words are presented throughout the manuscript in the original spelling and 
grammar).  
 
Table 4. 
Student Pre-Assessment of Human-Environment Cause and Effect Relationships 
 
Issue or Problem What Caused It? What are the Effects? 
Littering 
Oil spills 
Paper bags 
Animals coming into cities 
 
Deer are overpopulating 
Cutting down trees 
Wasting water 
Gasses/pollution 
Fire 
No trees 
Damage 
Bad water 
Pollution 
Throwing trash in environment 
Explosion 
Grocery shopping 
Humans tearing down habitats 
Not too many predators 
People 
Careless people 
Driving car 
Matches 
 
Too much paper made 
Hurricane or tornado 
Lead 
Oil spill 
Harm the environment 
Animals die 
Killing trees 
Animals coming closer into cities and 
towns 
Deer create big troubles 
Less oxygen 
Less water to drink 
Harm to animals 
Burn 
No habitat for animals 
The world world 
Getting sick 
Oil in the water 
 
 
Lesson 1: “Tuning In” to Consumption  
 
 
Everything comes from something, 
Nothing comes from nothing. 
Just like paper comes from trees, 
And glass comes from sand. 
— Carmen Agra Deedy 
(Excerpt from Agatha’s Featherbed: Not Just Another Wild Goose Story) 
 
 
Prompted by common household items such as canned goods an d shampoo bottles, students explore the origin of 
everyday products. Where have you seen these items? How are they used? What do you know about how they are 
made? They discover that all goods have a story or a life cycle—how they are manufactured or produced, shipped 
or distributed, and used and disposed of by consumers. At their basic, raw level, all products are made from 
natural resources. Following a teacher-guided discussion and a read -aloud such as Agatha’s Featherbed by Carmen 
Agra Deedy  and Laura L. Seeley (1994) , students learn whether the natural resources used to make goods  are 
renewable or non-renewable. They can then create a graphic organizer such as a T -chart using renewable and non-
[PAGE 10]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 63 
 
 
renewable as headings and then list the resources in what they think is the correct column . Feedback from the 
pilot indicated that most students categorized resources similarly, labeling trees as non-renewable. Although most 
trees can be classified as renewable, th e students were indeed correct: some trees do take longer to regrow than 
humans currently use them. This resulted in our revision of the final unit, clarifying that some natural resources are 
both renewable and non-renewable.  
 
In Part II, students begin their inquiry by “tuning in.” The teacher displays a paper bag and a plastic bag. Students 
record what they think they know and what their wonderings are about this issue in their inquiry journals. The 
teacher can also designate wall space within the classroom, often referred to as a “Wonder Wall,” on which 
students post their questions or “wonderings” on sticky notes. These notes , with their questions, serve to support 
and document their investigations.  Sample student “wonderings” from the pilot included: 
 
 Why do people litter and hurt our environment? 
 What will happen if we keep littering? 
 How many trees die to make paper, and how many animals die because of plastic in the ocean and on 
land? 
 What is plastic made of? 
 Is paper better than plastic? 
 How you could destroy plastic better, so it does not hurt the environment. 
 I wonder what if we lose trees and the oils, what will happen to earth?  
 I whant to know how we  can make sure people do not wa ist paper or plastic because if you wa ist paper 
and plastic for something really waistful and then throw it away we wouldn’t have a lot of paper or plastic, 
and then we won’t have a lot of trees for paper. 
 I want to find out how many things that are in the trash, that are supposed to be rycicled. 
 
Students’ questions focused their research throughout the inquiry and were revisited in each lesson.  
 
Lesson 2: “Finding Out” about Human Innovation  
 
The second lesson builds students’ understanding of the production of goods with a focus on why new goods are 
made to replace older products or ideas. By reading books like The Story of Inventions (Claybourne & Larkum, 
2007), students discover the intentional and unintentional co nsequences of human innovation . They record 
reflections to questions such as: Is a new discovery or technology always better than that which it replaces? Why or 
why not ?  Student responses suggested that innovations like iPads were  overall positive, but that not all 
technologies improve human life. For example, one student wrote, “Som people like books better than nooks.”  
During Part II, students participated in small research groups, taking notes from a variety of print -based and digital 
sources that were saved on a class social bookmarking account (Figure 4). 
 
Whereas most students focused their research on commonly used technology tools, others researched the specific 
innovation of paper and plastic bags. Handwritten notes based on print -based and digital research included: 
 
 First plactic sandwitch bag was made in 1957. Be tween 25 and 30 percent of packing for bread is plactic. 
Only 1 to 2% of plastic are getting recycled in the USA. Paper is better.  
 Approx. 380 billon bags are used in the united states every year. That’s more than 1,200 bags per year. In 
1852 paper bags were made 1852-2012 In 1957 plastic bags were made, 1957-2012 
 1957- First plastic sandwich is made. 1966 - Between 25 and 30 percent of packing for bread is plastic. 
1969- New York City begins collecting garbage in plastic bags. 1974 - Retail giants sears and J.C. Penny 
switch to plastic shopping bags. !977 - Super markets begin to say: paper or plastic? 1994 - Denmark creats 
firs plastic bag tax. 1997 - Over 80% of all bags used are plastic. 2002 - Ireland interduses the worlds first 
consumer paid plastic bag tax. 
[PAGE 11]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 64 
 
 
 There are diffrant plastic bags and are used for many purposes. In 1996 over 80% of all bags used are 
plastic. In 1957 the first sandwich bag was made. Approx. 380 billion plastic bags are used in the United 
States every year. That's more than 1,200 bags per US resident, per year. 
 
Early in these investigations, students determined the complexity of human innovations and how they can result in 
both beneficial and harmful impacts on humans, animals, and the environment.  
 
 
Figure 4. Georgia (left) and North Carolina (right) third grade student reflections on human innovation.  
 
Lesson 3: “Sorting Out” Diverse Perspectives  
 
In this third lesson, students’ skills in perspective -taking are enhanced through reading and discussing a work of 
fiction, such as Voices in the Park  (Browne, 1998), relating point of view and author’s voice to stakeholder 
perspectives. By being introduced to a variety of persp ectives, students begin to sort out  their research findings 
and to validate sources of information as they continue their investigations. They also reflect on their feelings 
during the inquiry, determining whether and how they have changed. Contrary to the  lesson’s focus on flexible 
thinking, the majority of students shared that their feelings remained constant, with most expressing persistently 
negative perceptions of plastic. “I still think paper is better because it decomposes quicker and paper is made o ut 
of trees and uses a renewable resource,” one recorded in her journal. Another wrote:  
 
I feel like paper & plastic are two very very different things. [Have my feelings changed? Why or 
why not?] No, because I still lik paper much much more. I like paper more because it is better for 
the envirerment and decomposses faster. 
 
Another student supported this belief: “My feelings haven’t changed. I still think plastic is worse.” Some admitted 
to feeling affirmed by their unchanged perspectives. For example, one wrote: “I feel great about what I’ve learned. 
My feelings have not changed. All of our research is leading to paper.” Unaltered perception s aside, another 

[PAGE 12]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 65 
 
 
explained that research has been helpful because “I have bin learning many more ways paper is better than 
plastic.”  
 
A few students expressed being up set by what they were learning ( even if feelings remained the same ). For 
example, one student wrote, “I feel sad because some animals died. My feelings haven’t changed.” Another 
shared: 
 
I am mad a bout what I have been learning. People are littering way too much. A lot of trash is 
going into the ocean and killing animals.  My feelings have not changed because I still think paper 
is better. 
 
In sum, while a few students in each class did express changing their perspectives as a result of the inquiry (e.g., 
“My feelings have changed a little bit because I didn’t recycle and used to use plastic bags”), the majority 
expressed unchanged beliefs. This finding suggests, perhaps, that some students may be less open to new 
information that changes their existing core belief structure about the environment and issues of sustainability. 
 
Lesson 4: Going Further - Local to Global Bag Politics  
 
Students go further  in their inquiry by learning how local, national, and international groups have responded to 
this issue of single -use, disposable grocery bags. The child-friendly version of the documentary film Bag It! (Hill & 
Beraza, 2010)  and websites such as ChicoBag (https://www.chicobag.com/track-movement) (2014) allow one to  
“Track the Movement” around the world. Students conclude how complex, controversial, and ever evolving  are 
environmental concerns, economic systems, and politics. Through collaborative research, students discover that 
policies set in place by governing bodies affect consumers’ choices.  During the pilot, many students expressed 
disdain for taxes and regulations, such as fees imposed on single -use grocery bags. Sample written comments 
included: 
 
 It is not fair to other people to get charged for what they buy becquse they will run out of money. 
 We should be able to use what we want to do! Government you stink.  
 It’s not fair to us. Because maybe we can't pay that much. 
 We should be alould to use plastick bags. 
 I dont think it is fair because some people need bags and dont want to pay 10 cent.  
 
Other students appeared to support governmental regulations when human activity causes harm. For example, 
one wrote that bags “can get in the ocean or kill an imals.” Another agreed:  “[the government] may place a ban 
because it is polluting the envirment.” Finally, one student specifically referenced the role of government in 
protecting human safety:  “People throw their single -use plastic bag on the road and could get cought in other 
people on the road and could reck.” 
 
Lesson 5: Making Conclusions, Making Informed Choices  
 
Drawing upon  their research -based findings and reflections , students begin to make conclusions  regarding the 
issue under investigation. They learn about human rights by watching Cartoons for Children's Rights (UNICEF, 2004) 
and discover their related responsibilities to one another and  to the environment. Students reflect upon how their 
ideas and feelings have changed throughout the inquiry, ultimately deciding upon what is most essential to 
communicate with others. Conclusions made by students during the pilot varied, some citing specific statistics they 
wanted to share, others explaining the negative effects of both paper and plastic bag production and disposal. 
Sample written statements included: 
 
 Both Plastic and PaPer are bad because Plastic is bad for the enviromen and PaPer cuts trees and we 
would not have any oxshugen and we will die. 
[PAGE 13]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 66 
 
 
 Americans use about 100 billion plastic bags per year. Paper bags are better for the enviroment. Paper 
goes through a better prosses of recycling. 
 I think we should put a ban on plastic. Using a high quality bad helps stop you from using disposeble begs 
each year I think we should have all of those rights from the story. 
 
Several students commented specifically on the inquiry process, calling it “fun,” whereas others elaborated: 
“Research is inportant because you look things up and you get to know more about paper and plastic. And keeping 
our enviroment safe and clean! ” We were pleased to learn that many students expressed awar eness that being 
informed is an essential part of one’s civic duties. 
 
Lesson 6: “Solutionaries” Taking Action  
 
In this culminating lesson, students determine how they can become change agents . Inspired by “solutionaries” 
worldwide, students review a list of possibilities in their inquiry journals , such as “design a poster by hand or using 
technology (e.g., Glogster )” or “write a script and create a video (e.g., Animoto) to promote awareness.” Students 
decide how they will take action. The North Carolina third graders chose among the options, some crafting a sign -
up sheet to “join the environment club” and collecting peers’ signatures. Unfortunately, due to time constraints at 
the end of the school year  and standardized testing in the 3 rd grade, they were unable to implement their plan. In 
contrast, through a coordinated effort of the teachers, students, and parents in Georgia , the school participated in 
a community “Let It Shine” art exhibit. The third graders  designed artwork and selected their favorite (Figure 3), 
which was screen-printed on reusable cloth bags and sold to raise money for UNICEF . In collaboration with a local 
environmental artist, they also created a quilt made of plastic bags and large -scale sculptures using recycled 
materials (Figure 5). The students put STEM into action through their research, design, and implementation of 
their chosen solutions, which was personally meaningful and had an impact in their communities. 
 
 
Figure 5. Original student artwork to bring awareness to the issue of single-use, disposable grocery bags. 

[PAGE 14]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 67 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Student-created plastic quilt and fish sculpture using recycled materials displayed at the community art exhibit. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
To raise new questions, new possibilities, to regard old problems from a new angle,  
requires creative imagination and marks real advance in science.  
— Albert Einstein 
 
 “Do You Want Paper or Plastic? ” challenges learners to consider the complex relationships between environment, 
society, technology, and science – including ethical questions they may face as consumers and citizens – and, 
ultimately, to translate these deliberations to informed and resp onsible action” (E. Hestness, personal 
communication, June 24, 2015). As a common household good, disposable bags were relatable to students in both 
regions. Although student perceptions of paper and plastic remained largely unchanged as a result of the in quiry, 
they expressed genuine concern, particularly f or animals and the environment. Students wanted to take action at 
the local level to bring awareness to the community  using their design skills . As the authors of A Framework for K -
12 Science Education  emphasize, science education “ should help students see how science and engineering are 
instrumental in addressing major challenges that confront society today”  (NRC, 2012, p. 9). The curriculum pilot 
provided evidence of this critical need.  
 
Teachers participating in the pilot also expressed how their involvement improved their own teaching practices, 
knowledge of environmental issues , and personal behaviors . One commented that the unit pilot prompted her to 
be more “purposeful” as she approaches  teaching issues of environmental sustainability across the curriculum. 
Another shared: 
 
I was amazed at how involved and interested students became in the environmental issues. This 
made my perception a lot more positive in the fact that these students care so muc h about this 
issue. Also, this pilot made me begin practicing what I preach. I since have bought these two 
canvas baskets that fold flat that I keep in my car to carry my groceries to avoid ever using plastic 
bags. 
 
Another reflected upon the positive impact of students’ passion for the subject matter. “My students would not let 
me throw ANYTHING away. I have begun using the cloth bags that were stuffed in my trunk more often,” one 

[PAGE 15]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 68 
 
 
teacher shared. A different teacher agreed that the unit “ definitely opened my eyes and opened a new door to a 
number of ways that I can take my part in keeping the environment cleaner and protect my BEAUTIFUL 
environment!” 
 
As with all curriculum pilots, our work was not without its challenges, with time constraints being most restrictive.  
“In reality we have about 30 minutes a day to teach the science standards,” one teacher commented.  As a result, 
many classroom teachers were unable to complete the unit and to fully support students’ action -taking due to 
end-of-grade testing and the amount of dedicated time needed to thoughtfully implement the lessons and inquiry 
cycle. One veteran teacher expressed frustration that “ there is neither time nor space in the curriculum for 
[teachers] to implement [meaningful] curriculums to the d egree that t hey should be” and that he is “ very 
disappointed that we did not complete/ implement the curriculum to the degree we should have  - this was an 
injustice to the curriculum (which is extremely well thought out and written).”  Another teacher at the same school 
agreed: 
 
The one thing I would say that did not work too well was the time frame that I was given to teach 
the lesson. There is A LOT of information in this unit, and it is somewhat unreasonable to teach all 
of the conte nt with the small amount of instructional time given for science. All great and 
important information, just not sure that it is AS important as the others considering the amount 
of time it demands (like language arts, reading, or math) due to testing of th ese other subjects. 
 
Although “excited” to teach the unit, another commented that the “reality of time constraints prevented me from 
getting through the entire thing as efficiently and thoroughly as I would have liked.”  
 
The diverse use of technology tools was also  deemed both beneficial and  frustrating. One teacher shared how 
technology can engage students in the learning process in unexpected ways: 
 
I had not ever used technology prior to this experience as much as I did in this unit. I would 
typically use technology in the presentation of the material I was teaching; but through this unit, I 
used it in every way possible. Not only did I teach with the technology, but also  I allowed the 
students to use it as well through an e xtended project. They had not even seen the computer that 
many times throughout a week prior to the unit. They were extremely excited about that, I might 
add. ;) I also want to mention that one of my students followed the unit up (without being asked) 
with a PowerPoint presentation containing information about what she learned. She claimed that 
she would "Show it to friends so that they will no more about how to save our planet!"  
 
Several teachers also commented that the tools allowed them to be more effici ent and taught the students new 
skills. The social bookmarking site delicious.com was considered valuable as it “led students right to what you need 
them to see, but then it also let them begin learning researching skills by searching for answers to questions asked  
of them,” one teacher shared. T echnology malfunctions could be frustrating , however. “Several of the links were 
broken,” one teacher wrote.  Although time constraints prohibited one from fully incorporating technology in the 
unit’s lessons, one teacher plans to “spend some time learning moviemaking /editing techniques so that we could 
have realized some of the projects undertaken.” 
 
In closing, environmental education researcher Scott Morrison underscores that “ Students must be taught not only 
about what is wrong in the world; they must also be equipped with the skills necessary to advocate for peace, 
justice, and sustainability. [“ Do You Want Paper or Plastic? ”] is a step in that direction”  (S. Morrison, personal 
communication, June 29, 2015). When immersed in the study of “stuff,” students engage in deep , critical thinking 
about their roles as consume rs and how they can be change agents. As the pilot  results suggest, deep, integrated 
learning does require dedicated time and support. These findings reflect prior research on teaching EE as teachers 
express concerns regarding the time required to plan and  teach environmental topics (Christenson, 2004). Indeed, 
there is documented need to approach EE from a multidisciplinary and cultural perspective with a focus on 
sustainability (Davis, 2009; Duhn, 2012).  Environmental education should not be reserved for one content area 
(such as science) or one 30 -minute time frame after other more seemingly critical subjects are taught (e.g., ELA or 
[PAGE 16]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 69 
 
 
mathematics). With appropriate scaffolding , we believe that children can be empowered to see themselves as 
“solutionaries” who change their personal choices to contr ibute positively to their world, who develop larger 
solutions that addres s broad issues such as environmental sustainability. We hope that “ Do You Want Paper or 
plastic?” is one such resource to support teachers in these efforts. 
[PAGE 17]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 70 
 
 
References 
 
Browne, A. (1998). Voices in the park. New York: DK Publishing. 
 
Claybourne, A., & Larkum, A. (2007). The story of inventions. London: Usborne Pub Ltd. 
 
ChicoBag. (2014). Track the movement. Retrieved from http://www.chicobag.com/track-movement. 
 
Christenson, M. (2004). Teaching multiple perspectives on environmental issues in elementary classrooms: A story  
of teacher inquiry. The Journal of Environmental Education, 35(4), 3-16. 
 
Cole, A. (2007). Expanding the field: Revisiting environmental education principles through multidisciplinary 
frameworks. The Journal of Environmental Education, 38(2), 35-45. 
 
Conde, M. D. C., &  Sánchez, J. S. (2010). The school curriculum and environmental education: A school 
environmental audit experience. International Journal of Environmental and Science Education, 5( 4), 477-
494. 
 
Davis, J. (2009). Revealing the research ‘hole’of early childh ood education for sustainability: A preliminary survey 
of the literature. Environmental Education Research, 15(2), 227-241.  
 
Deedy, C. A., & Seeley, L.L. (1994). Agatha’s feather bed: Not just another wild goose story. Atlanta, GA: Peachtree 
Publishers. 
 
Dimopoulos, D. I., Paraskevopoulos, S., & Pantis, J. D. (2009). Planning educational activities and teaching 
strategies on constructing a conservation educational module. International Journal of Environmental and 
Science Education, 4(4), 351-364. 
 
Duhn, I. (2012). Making ‘place’ for ecological sustainability in early childhood education. Environmental Education 
Research, 18(1), 19-29. 
 
Forbes, C. T., & Zint, M. (2010). Elementary teachers’ beliefs about, perceived competencies for, and reported use 
of scientific inquiry to promote student learning about and for the environment. The Journal of 
environmental education, 42(1), 30-42. 
 
Hardy, J. M. (2011). A" right" way to teach about endangered species?: An analysis and comparison of two 
environmental e ducation approaches using North Atlantic right whales as a case study (Doctoral 
dissertation, University of Georgia). 
 
Hill, M. & Beraza, S. (2010). Bag it: Is your life too plastic? United States: Reel Thing Production Films. 
 
Institute for Humane Education. (n.d.). What is a solutionary? Retrieved from 
http://humaneeducation.org/become-a-humane-educator/what-is-humane-education/what-is-a-
solutionary/. 
 
Jordan, C.  (2007). Plastic bags [digital image]. Running the numbers: An American self -portrait (2006 - Current). 
Retrieved from http://www.chrisjordan.com/gallery/rtn/#plastic-bags. 
 
Kopnina, H. (2013). An exploratory c ase study of Dutch children's attitudes toward consumption: Implications for 
environmental education. The Journal of Environmental Education, 44(2), 128-144.  
 
Locke, S. (2009). Environmental education for democracy and social justice in Costa Rica. International Research in 
Geographical and Environmental Education, 18(2), 97-110. 
[PAGE 18]
International Journal of Early Childhood Environmental Education, 3(1), p. 71 
 
 
 
Murdoch, K. (1998). Classroom connections: Strategies for integrated learning. Prahran Victoria, Australia: Eleanor 
Curtain Publishing. 
 
North American Association for Environmental Education (2011). Developing a framework for assessing 
environmental literacy. Retrieved from 
http://www.naaee.net/sites/default/files/framework/DevFramewkAssessEnvLitOnlineEd.pdf . 
 
National Research Council (NRC). (2012). A framework for K -12 science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts, 
and core ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
 
Özsoy, S., &  Ahi, B. (2014). Elementary School Students’ Perceptions of the Future Environment through Artwork. 
Educational Sciences: Theory & Practice, 14(4), 1570-1582.  
 
Sagy, G., & Tal, A. (2015). Greening the curriculum: Current trends in environmental education in Israel's public 
schools. Israel Studies, 20(1), 57-85.  
 
Terry, B. (2014). Beach plastic [digital image]. Retrieved from http://myplasticfreelife.com/. 
 
UNICEF. (2004). Cartoons for children's rights. Retrieved from 
http://www.unicef.org/videoaudio/video_top_cartoons.html. 
 
United Nations. (n.d.). United Nations Millennium Development Goals. Retrieved from 
http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/. 
 
United States Fund for UNICEF. (2014). Retrieved from http://teachunicef.org/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Elizabeth O. Crawford is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Early Childhood, Elementary, Middle, Literacy, and Special 
Education at the University of North Carolina Wilmington.  She can be reached at crawforde@uncw.edu. 
 
Nancy Luke is an Assistant Professor of Elementary Education and Digital Literacy in the School of Teaching and Learning at 
Western Carolina University. She can be reached at ncluke@wcu.edu. 
 
William Van Pelt is the CEO of HeartGift, an organization providing lifesaving heart surgery to children from around the world. 
He can be reached at wvanpelt@heartgift.org.
