
Britain's new foreign minister has delivered an impassioned historic speech in the House of Commons. For the first time, declaring Israel's, occupation of the West Bank unlawful. Ed miliband also announced trade bans against Israeli. Settlers Australia has been a partner with the UK and other countries in efforts to prevent the expansion of settlements to defend the diminishing Prospect of a future Palestinian state.

But this time has chosen not to join the UK here, 730's, political editor Jacobreber, In the West Bank, Israeli bulldozers were busy last week tearing down a Palestinian Farmers. Olive Groves, a source of pride and his livelihood. What did the olives do to them these olive trees? What do they do?

When you see the olive trees, being uprooted by the bulldozer, it breaks your heart. A day later a funeral for two Palestinian. Teens. Local officials said they were killed by Israeli settlers and soldiers in an attack on their Village. All adding to anxiety over Israel, settler movement and fears.

It's undermining a future Palestinian. And it is precisely this belief in the rights and freedoms of the Israeli and Palestinian people that leaves many including me to a deep sense of Shame about what has unfolded in Palestine under the eyes of the International Community. Ed Miller Band, the son of a holocaust Survivor becoming the first British foreign secretary to declare that Israel's 1967.

Occupation of the West Bank is against international law. Now, for a long time, the British government has rightly said settlements are illegal, but we have remained silent on the question of the legality of the occupation as a whole, which in 2024 the international court of justice concluded was unlawful today.

I announced that the official view of the British government is that the occupation is unlawful ID. Miliband told the House of Commons that Israel last month crossed a long-standing red line by issuing tenders for more than 1200 homes. In a 12 square, kilometres Slice of land east of Jerusalem.

Known as E1. Let's be absolutely clear what this means, the creation of a set of facts on the ground to make the two-state solution unviable in response. Britain is now moving to impose an import ban on goods from a legal settlement in the occupied territories. The British government agrees that there is ethnic cleansing of Palestinians in areas of the West Bank perpetrated by settler terrorists and all too often.

The Israeli government has turned a blind eye to this and worse members of it. Have made statements and taken actions to support the forced displacement of Palestinians. The accusations made today by the foreign secretary. In the British Parliament were outrageous lies. Israel's foreign minister retaliated with a vow to close.

The British Consulate in East Jerusalem. Any foreign activity in the area must be conducted through accepted and agreed channels. And without violating Israel's sovereignty, Britain is not the only country planning to put restrictions on trade from a legal settlements. Canada France, Spain and Sweden are among those on board.

Even the Trump Administration staunch supporter of the Netanyahu government appeared reluctant to criticise. Britain's move. We were made aware that they were going to make this decision. We heard their arguments as to why, but look, we share the goal of stability. But there have been notable abstentions, including Germany, Italy, Japan and New Zealand.

The Australian government has also quietly booked at joining. Britain's outright trade ban a decision. That was today welcomed by Israel's Ambassador Australia is not at this time pursuing, a blanket style import ban. We have concerns about the implementation of a blanket ban and unintended consequences for Australian businesses for Palestinians and for Israelis a position that has angered many progressives even on the government's back bench, we can't say we're for the state of Palestine, which I'm very much a supporter of and ignore the fact that the illegal settlements are undermining, the ability for a state of Palestine to emerge.

We need to take action. The reason why they're not taking action, Is apparently to help Palestinians. This is unbelievable gaslighting from labour, but the key thing we want to get in in israel, and Palestine is the two-state solution. And the question is, whether any of these sanctions actually lead you towards the two-state solution and I'm not sure that they do.

Yeah, Albanese government's reluctance to join. Britain's trade ban contrast with a year ago when it worked with countries led by Canada France and the UK on the recognition of a Palestinian State this year. It's instead emphasised that it will continue to take direct action by targeting supporters of the settler movement right now Australians can't trade with sanctioned individuals or entities in the West Bank.

Other reasons for not joining the UK's trade ban include concerns, it would undermine Australia's status as a trading Nation and that it's a blunt instrument. It's also worth remembering. The Prime Minister has a long history of battling. The greens in his own seat, over the boycott divestment and sanctions movement against Israel, we have taken action that Minister netanyahu's government has made very clear.

That they are more than displeased with with Israel heading to an election. In late October tensions, over settlements are unlikely to Abate. In the meantime, Australia's official position is to pursue further targeted measures against what it calls, illegal settlement and settler violence. We've been clear that Netanyahu government's actions in the West Bank.

The Rapidian expansion settlements, the proposed E1 settlement development and flagrant settler violence are extinguishing the possibility of a two-state solution and that remains the only path to enduring peace and security for Israelis and Palestinians.

Joining me now live from Westminster is the chair of the UK Foreign Affairs. Select committee. Labour MP Dame, Emily Thornbury. Uh, Dem Emily Thornbury. Welcome to 7, 30. Thank you. Why has the UK government chosen? This moment to deliver new sanctions, so close to the Israeli election. I think it's our own timetable and our own timetable is this uh the labour government.

I think took the took Britain in a different direction in terms of foreign policy and uh and it was and was largely in the right place but just never went far enough when it came to the Middle East and so with the change of prime minister, it was an opportunity for us to get it right?

And to push much further and so people like me who have been campaigning for years. This was a really important moment. Um and we were very pleased to see that the new prime minister, the new foreign secretary, and the new Minister responsible for the Middle East, all agreed that we had to go further.

And we had to at last introduce trade, sanctions with the West Bank. Um, and with the occupied territories, we have a trade agreement with Israel. We give we give tariffs that are on a beneficial basis to Israel proper, but not to the West Bank, but we just needed to stop trade with.

West Bank. But also, perhaps even more. Importantly, we started seeing some Flats that were being built as part of the settlement project being advertised in London, it was completely disgusting and we had to stop that. So we're also stopping all services, so no money is to go through London.

No, financial assistance, no mortgages, no, no citations assistance, nothing nothing like that, no Architects. Nothing. We are not to help the building of these settlements and the attempt by this far, right, Netanyahu government to snuff out Palestine. We are not going to be involved in it in any way.

Let's just talk about the moment. However, because there are senior Israelis opposed to the Netanyahu government and opposed to the settlement projects who say you should have waited till after the election because this risks bolstering Netanyahu and his government. Well, we've had a whole load of different courses.

Oh, were you looking for it? Yeah. Oh, I'm trying to. I'm trying to record the thing for you. What do you need it for? Can I just have it until the end of this? Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Um, some saying that it doesn't amount to anything, you know, that it doesn't amount to anything and so why are we bothering?

And then on the other hand, we're told it amounts to a great deal and it could affect the election. I mean, can I just say two things? First of all my view is, I agree with them. This is the wrong time, it should have happened two years ago, at the very least, we should have done it much earlier than we had.

But, you know, this new government's only been in for seven weeks. Yes. If I may just jump in for a moment though, given that you say this should have happened some time ago, could you not have waited a number of weeks till after the election? Well, do you know what?

I think that the thing which may affect the whether Netanyahu gets re-elected or not? Is these new reports that are coming out that he was warned or his government was warned that there was going to be the attack, um, on on Israeli citizens and that it wasn't that there was no reaction to it.

And and I think that there's a lot of anger developing in Israel about that. Listen, Israel is a democracy. People have lots and lots of different opinions. Some people might say that what is happening in the UK is somehow supporting Netanyahu. A lot of other people may well say that it is wrong, it's terrible for Israel to become increasingly isolated from the International Community because of the behaviour of its far-right government and actually for Israel to kind of step back into the fold, it would be good if they were able to change the the direction in which they're going and the way in which they're treating Palestinians.

Now as you know, Australia Works very closely with the UK and Other countries both in support of a future Palestinian State. And to prevent the To prevent further settlement building in the West Bank, did you expect the Australian? Government would join the UK in this action? I think it was hoped that they might, but here all countries have their own decisions to make.

We all want the same thing. And nobody says, this is easy, this is hard. I have a lot of time for Penny Wong, and I don't know the basis upon which she's made a decision, not to be involved with us, but I'm sure that, you know, she believes that what she's doing is in the interests of Palestinians and in the interests of Justice, um, obviously we take a slightly different view.

Well, the reason that Australia as we understand so far doesn't support the import ban is according to Penny Wong because it could have unintended consequences for businesses for Palestinians, as well as Israelis. So why do you think that this is an effective tool when the foreign minister Penny Wong?

Who as you say has the same, uh, once the same thing for the Palestinians, She disagrees with you about that. I think that the um, the Ambassador from Palestine has had a big influence here in the UK, he has made it clear that it is in the interest of Palestinians for this to happen.

Um, there's also sometimes people say well how can we be sure whether these Goods come from Israel or whether they come from Palestine? But because we've had a trade agreement with Israel where we've only been focused on Goods from Israel, proper and have distinguished between those from Palestine. Um, we've been able to get round problems in terms of the rules of origin and we believe that we can continue to do so.

So perhaps we start from a slightly different place and there are different discussions happening. But you know I'm, I'm always happy to uh, to talk to my Australian friends and maybe even persuade them. At the same time, the amount of money that the UK trades with the settlements. We don't have an exact number, but we understand it to be very small.

So, is this anything? Open symbolic. Which links to my previous questions about the timing is this? Just a symbolic act? This is doing the right thing. This is looking at the law looking at looking at. Morality looking at what's going on in the West Bank, and in Gaza and saying we have to, we can't just stand on the sidelines and ring our hands.

We have to do something about it. We have, we have taken out sanctions against particular individuals, but we have to take a much broader approach to it, and we must take a stance and we're very pleased that we've been able to do that in conjunction with some of our friends and allies.

We need to be strong about this forthright and clear. Now, I want to ask you about how this relates to British domestic politics. Uh, you've got a new prime minister obviously, a new foreign minister in Ed Miller band and a party conference just around the corner. Is this also a way of Shoring up, Labor's Progressive Wing who were unhappy for so long under kirstama

It was about getting in a new prime minister having conversations with him earlier. I mean, I don't I'm not making him a secret of the fact that my first conversation with the new prime minister was You need to sort this out on on foreign policy we've got this wrong and we need to make it.

We need to to move on it and we need need to move on it. Clearly, I spoke to Ed miliband about it as well and I know that I'm not the only person, you know, there was a lot of Of discontent that whenever we did anything on the Middle East, we were always doing too little and too late.

I was part of a move that had been trying to get the recognition of Palestine. I'd been I've been campaigning for it for 15 years and was really pleased when the government finally agreed to it, but it should have been, it should have happened a long time ago. We we feel as though in Britain, we're always, you know, trailing on after the events.

And that's why we had to kind of get in front of this. And with the new government, it was a really good opportunity to, to change the way in which we approach this and to be clear, and to change the tone but also to change the approach. Now, Ed milaband described today, a deep deep sense of urgency about the West Bank and about the building of settlements Australia, clearly concurs with that view.

But what does this act do meaningfully to hold back settlement building and I'm thinking particularly about the large A settlement called E1, which would if it goes ahead split the potential future Palestinian State. What does this do practically to hold back settlement building? I mean it's a good point, you know, because because the those are complaining about the timing of this sort of, it's convenient for them to overlook that contracts have been put out for the building on of on this area called E1.

And for viewers, the who may not know this E1 is the final little bit of the of the puzzle of the jigsaw that is going to finally cut uh, Palestine in two and cut it off from East Jerusalem. This will have a massive effect on Palestine. It has to stop and actually the Americans until now have been holding the Israelis back, but the Americans seem to be distracted and not paying attention to this sufficiently now.

And so it looks like um the Israelis this far-right government thinks that they can go ahead with it. So the contract as far as I know have been put at they've gone out for tender and will be signed the week before the general election in Israel. Now that timing is presumably done on purpose.

And people then can't turn around and say why is Britain doing this so urgently? Well it's clear. We don't want any British architects to be helping with the building of E1. We do not want to have any building, contractors, any material coming from the UK, any money, any assistance to the building of E1?

You know, we do not want to be involved in any of those contracts. And we want to keep well away from it because it is in breach of international law and it is morally wrong, just to finish. I wanted to ask you for your comments on the responses. We understand it from the United States, surprisingly, perhaps Marco Rubio, was very measured.

Said, they knew about the decision that was about to be taken by the British. But did not express, did not express any anger or, or opposition to the move. Did that take you by surprise? No. And what we're doing is in accordance with international law, no but I guess I guess what I'm I guess what I'm asking you I guess what I'm asking you Israeli is absolutely for the America Israeli government have reacted in this way in a quite a mild way.

Well you know the Israelis had these this Israeli government has explicitly said that what they're doing, they are doing on purpose to extinguish the hope the possibility of a Palestinian State. They are doing this on purpose, they are going as fast as they can. It is right for us.

Sovereign Nations to do everything that we can to try to stop it. If we particularly, Britain has a responsibility during our time when we had the Mandate when we were in charge of the whole area and where we gave such encouragement and insistence to the creation of the state of Israel.

But we did let down the Palestinians and the Palestinians deserve to have a state as well. And they deserve to have some justice and we can't just carry on standing on the sidelines and going, oh, isn't this awful? I wish we could do something about it. Well, we can Guy.

Emily Thornbury. Thank you very much indeed, for joining me. I appreciate it.

Hot spring conditions have fuelled multiple bushfires across Australia. This past week as the small window to prepare properties, rapidly closes a small team in Regional Queensland is hoping to convince the nation's Farmers. There are other options

And talk about every Is coming tonight and make sure that we all owe the information that we need. Whether it's allergies.