[PAGE 1]
International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning 
Volume 18, Number 7                   
                                     
November – 2017 
Special Report on the Role of Open Educational 
Resources in Supporting the Sustainable Development 
Goal 4: Quality Education Challenges and Opportunities 
 
Dr Rory McGreal 
UNESCO/COL/ICDE Chair in OER 
Athabasca University 
 
 
Quality Education: Role/Contribution of OER 
Open Educational Resources ( OER) and their offspring, Massive Open Online Courses (MO OCs), are 
becoming important factors in achieving the Sustainable Development Goal 4: Quality Education 
(SDG4). This was recognised early on by UNESCO in 2004 when they first coined the term “Open 
Educational Resources” and in 2012 with the OER Paris Decla ration. UNESCO is continuing its support of 
OER with the 2 nd OER Summit in September 2017. There is recognition that OER and MOOCs, while not 
being the solution to the world's educational crises, will play an important, if not essential, role. The OER 
movement is less than 15 years old and is growing rapidly as more and more nations and institutions 
adopt the view that publicly -funded research and educational content belongs to the people and should 
therefore be open and accessible to them. Canada can play an important role in supporting SDG4 by 
increasing its support for OER and open education in general, both in Canada and abroad.  
It is reasonable to argue that OER can greatly benefit developing countries, even more so than those that 
are considered develo ped. As such, they can play an important transformative role in supporting the 
SDG4 goal. OER can be used to increase access to learning for those living in unfavourable circumstances, 
and can also be used to address issues of cost, quality, and equity. Th ey are free of licensing restrictions 
that inhibit quality improvements and because they are openly available, OER can facilitate both internal 
and external collaborations among instructors and institutions, both locally and internationally, while 
ensuring equitable access to knowledge and learning. OER are presently being actively used in all sectors 
of education including literacy, vocational, and adult education, as well as with immigrants and refugees 
(with prior learning assessment and recognition). OE R can be instrumental in improving the quality of 
[PAGE 2]
Special Report on the Role of Open Educational Resources in Supporting the Sustainable Development Goal 4 
McGreal 
293 
 
education through open curriculum development. And, most importantly, OER are digital; the world 
economy is digital and students must learn how to work (and play) in digital environments.  
Because OER can be reproduced at virtually no cost, they can be effectively used to reach vast numbers of 
learners, while supporting quality enhancements. As well, since they can be reused, revised, remixed, 
redistributed, and retained, OER can be adapted to different learn ing environments (Wiley, 2014). It was 
UNESCO that first used the term open educational resources , defining them as “ teaching, learning or 
research materials that are in the public domain or released with an intellectual property license that 
allows for fr ee use, adaptation, and distribution ” (UNESCO, 2002, par. 2).  The UNESCO Paris 
Declaration of 2012 followed, supporting OER for development and recommending that educational 
materials developed with public funds be made available under open licenses (UNE SCO, 2012). 
Additionally, because OER are open, they can be translated into different languages and localised to meet 
the needs of different countries, regions, institutions, and learners (Butcher, Kanwar, & Uvalic -Trubic, 
2015). 
OER, as content, are free of cost to learners and teachers. However, there are other costs that must be 
taken into account, including the salaries and time of the OER creators/adapters/assemblers. These costs 
can be significantly reduced by sharing OER with other institutions. For example, an institution, rather 
than creating its own course material, can choose to make use of OER that have been created by others, 
thus saving the cost of content creation; however, there still may be costs for searching/finding, 
assembling, and adapting the content. In addition, an appropriate technological infrastructure needs to be 
in place with access to adequate bandwidth and wifi, as well as trained support staff. (Please note that 
these costs are the same when using commercial content.) Furthermo re, the cost of commercial textbooks 
is becoming a greater problem as the prices are all too often increasing beyond the ability of students to 
pay for them. As a result, there has been rapid growth in the number of learners internationally, who 
cannot aff ord the high cost of textbooks. The advantage of OER is that they are cost -free and can be 
adapted freely. The ability to adapt and modify content is an important advantage, especially when 
targeting specific populations such as those with disabilities or special needs.  
 
Indigenous Knowledge 
OER can also be used to preserve and distribute Indigenous knowledge, which is being supported now in 
many countries. OER can be used to support the “participatory principle” that is common in many 
Indigenous communiti es, as well as preserving and distributing Indigenous knowledge that has 
traditionally been open. Indigenous knowledge is seen as belonging to the community as a whole and like 
OER, it can be continually enhanced and expressed in many forms such as in stor ies, dance, songs, and 
through the wisdom of elders. Sharing is conducted through personal interactions among the 
community/kinship or religious groups (Bertini, 2010). 
Maskwacis First Nation Cultural College 
As a Canadian example, in Alberta, the Chair has worked with this college to introduce them to OER. They 
received funding from the Ministry of Advanced Education for the development of Indigenous content 
[PAGE 3]
Special Report on the Role of Open Educational Resources in Supporting the Sustainable Development Goal 4 
McGreal 
294 
 
aimed at driving “stronger Indigenous perspectives in Alberta post -secondary learning.”  The projec t was 
designed to support the need for Indigenous students to learn in new technological environments and 
become digital citizens, while maintaining their Indigenous perspectives.  They have implemented several 
courses in OER and even translated the Creative Commons licences into the Cree language.    
Indo-Educa 
This is a community -based OER project building a repository for Indigenous content in both Portuguese 
and different Indigenous languages. The organisers believed that OER was a concept “fundamentall y in 
sync” with the Indigenous way of knowing. The aim was also to preserve traditional knowledge, while 
linking Indigenous communities with the wider society. Indigenous university students were enlisted to 
prepare relevant and appropriate OER for use in schools. The OER preserve and open access to more than 
200 traditional stories, rituals, beliefs, and other cultural artefacts (Rossini & Castro, 2016).  
AgShare II 
This is a collaborative project in OER of three universities: Haramaya (Ethiopia), Makerere  (Uganda), and 
Mekelle (Ethiopia). Its aim was to investigate the forms of Agricultural Indigenous Knowledge used by 
different groups of farmers for managing soil fertility and preparation, pest control, and diseases, weed 
control, planting, harvesting and  storage of Indigenous root crops and animals (AgShare II, 2015,). This 
research project sponsored by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation  has determined good strategies for 
documenting and disseminating Indigenous knowledge as OER, which is contributin g to both sustainable 
food security efforts and educational for all. 
Considered very important by many are the affordances available with OER that support innovation in 
teaching and learning. The training of faculty in the use of educational technology is a major task. Faculty 
must not only master the technology, but also be skilled in its pedagogical uses to improve learning 
outcomes. OER, because of the flexibility and openness, can enable the best teaching practices and 
increase student achievement levels both for knowledge and skills.  The open licences used by OER, unlike 
commercial content, allow users to localise content to meet the special conditions of learners, teachers, 
institutions, and nations. For example, OER can be designed to meet the accred itation requirements of 
schools and agencies, or they can be translated to local languages or adapted to respect the exigencies of a 
particular culture. They can also be used to support active learning by students. OER can be manipulated 
and altered to sup port this and other constructivist approaches to learning; students can work with 
instructors in creating more effective learning environments (Butcher & Hoosen, 2012).  
OER can be used to create alternate or complementary pathways to education. It is estim ated that there 
will be a need for more than 80 million places for additional students internationally by 2025 (Daniel, 
2012). OER can be used to create additional places using access to credentials as, for example, the case of 
the OERu, which is a consort ium of plus 30 institutions on five continents, creating OER pathways to 
degrees from credible public universities (Mackintosh, McGreal, & Taylor, 2011).  
MOOCs grew out of the open education movement and, as such, represent an important part of the OER 
landscape. Yuan and Powell (2013) have described how MOOCs developed out of the OER, open 
education, open source, and open access movements, although there are also commercially licensed 
[PAGE 4]
Special Report on the Role of Open Educational Resources in Supporting the Sustainable Development Goal 4 
McGreal 
295 
 
versions of MOOCs now in operation, such as Udacity and Coursera. Weller  (2014) has described MOOCs 
(at least the non -commercial ones) “as part of a continuum” that has proceeded from open source 
computing, to open access, OER, and open education.  
Commercial etextbooks and other content come with Digital Rights Management (DR M) otherwise 
known as Technological Protection Measures (TPM) or colloquially as “digital locks.” These “locks” on 
materials restrict students from making effective use of the content. They cannot copy, paste, highlight, 
print out, change devices, etc. In addition, there are legal restrictions that prevent users from breaking 
locks or making use of the content as they would like. For example, they are legally prohibited from 
showing their etextbook content to anyone else. The publishers own all the data cre ated, and they 
control how the textbook is used. Because of these restrictions, it is essential for educators to use OER, 
which can be used freely without locks or legal restrictions. 
Canada: An International Leader in OER 
Canada has important areas of exp ertise in OER at the post -secondary level. Although there is no federal 
government strategy specifically supporting OER or other forms of open education, there has been activity 
at the provincial level in Western Canada, and more recently in Ontario with t he creation of eCampus 
Ontario. For the most part, OER development and open initiatives in Canada have focused at the level of 
individual institutions and on access and availability issues as opposed to practice and policy and/or 
initiatives to encourage openness (McGreal, Anderson, & Conrad, 2015).  
Canada is unique in the world in that it is the only country whose national government has no authority in 
education; in Canada, education is exclusively a provincial responsibility. In large and complex 
countries with diverse educational institutions, especially in a Confederation such as Canada, 
where each province has total autonomy in education, it is difficult to be aware of the many 
varied practices and policies that are emerging. While other countries can  develop national 
policies, it is only possible in Canada to develop trans -Canadian provincial partnerships in 
education, but these partnerships operate without national government involvement. 
Nevertheless, there are several national open access initiativ es, including the federal government's Open 
Data pilot project, which enables access to content that can be used to support OER development. In 
addition, the Tri-Council funding agencies—Canadian Institutes of Health Research  (CIHR), the Natural 
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada  (NSERC), and the Social Sciences and 
Humanities Research Council  (SSHRC)—have all agreed on a Tri-Agency Open Access Policy , 
supporting open access publishing of all federally -funded research. While, this federal policy focuses on 
research publications, many of these, when used for teaching, can be considered to be OER. The re is 
confusion between OER and open access, along with the concept of openness in general; there is a large 
grey area between open access and OER, in addition to openness. Even so, the federal government 
policies support the principle that all publicly-funded content should be openly accessible and reusable. 
Nationally, the Council of Ministers of Education, Canada  (CMEC) has supported the UNESCO OER 
[PAGE 5]
Special Report on the Role of Open Educational Resources in Supporting the Sustainable Development Goal 4 
McGreal 
296 
 
Paris Declaration, reaffirming “their commitment to open access to knowledge and education and to the 
need to adapt teaching and learning practices to the new realities of the information age" (Council of 
Ministers of Education Canada, 2012, p.15).  The Vancouver -based Commonwealth of Learning was a co-
partner with UNESCO in initiating the first UNESCO conferen ce in 2012; and they are continuing this 
partnership in supporting the 2017 UNESCO summit in Slovenia.  
Canada is perceived as a world leader in OER, primarily because of the initiatives in British Columbia and 
Alberta. B.C. was the first province to initia te an OER project where BCcampus has created and populated 
a repository of more than 150 open textbooks. Alberta followed with a $2 million project to support the 
creation, assembly, and adaptation of OER. Regionally, the three Western provinces of British  Columbia, 
Alberta, and Saskatchewan have signed a Memorandum of Understanding  agreeing to cooperate on the 
development of common OER (Memorandum of Understanding, 2014). Alberta, Campus Manitoba and 
eCampus Ontario have partnered with BCcampus in using th e Open Textbook repository. In 2016, 
eCampus Ontario sponsored an OER Request for Proposals available to Ontario post -secondary 
institutions.  
Canadian leadership has been recognised by the Open Educati on Consortium: Alberta hosted the 2015 
international conference in Banff Athabasca University received an Award of Excellence for the OER 
Knowledge Cloud, a repository of more than 1600 scholarly articles and reports related to OER; the 
UNESCO/COL/ICDE Cha ir at Athabasca University received a Lifetime Achievement Award; and 
BCcampus has also received an Open Education Consortium Award of Excellence in Education.  
The reality in Canada is that, although there are significant initiatives in OER at the post -secondary level, 
there is little if any activity in the primary and secondary levels (K12) other than ad hoc implementations 
by individual teachers. (Unlike the USA, where there are now more than 25 states supporting OER in K12 
schools, and South Africa with Siyavula's open textbooks for primary and secondary schools).  
The creation and use of OER benefits from the development and use of Creative Commons licences, which 
provide the legal framework to share these resources. Creative Commons (CC) Canada, an affil iate of the 
larger international body,  is an organization b orn of the global open education movement. The author of 
this paper and UNESCO Chair is the board member of CC Canada, and Canadian -born Ryan Merkley is 
now the CEO of Creative Commons worldwide. M ost recently, in May 2017, the CC international Summit 
meeting was held in Toronto. 
OER universitas (OERu) offers free online university courses in collaboration with Canadian partners so 
that learners can gain formal credentials from the partner instituti ons. As has been previously noted, 
OERu is a consortium of more than 30 institutions and several organizations on five continents. It is 
dedicated to widening access and reducing the cost of post -secondary education for learners 
internationally by providin g OER pathways to achieve formal and recognized credentials (McGreal, 
Mackintosh, & Taylor, 2013). There are seven members of the OERu located in Canada: three universities 
(Athabasca, Thompson Rivers, and Kwantlen Polytechnic); one community college (Port age College in 
Alberta); and three organizations (BCcampus, eCampus Alberta, and Contact North in Ontario). Two 
Canadians sit on the OERu Board of Directors: Dr. David Porter, CEO of eCampus Ontario, and Prof. Rory 
McGreal, UNESCO/COL/ICDE Chair in OER. 
[PAGE 6]
Special Report on the Role of Open Educational Resources in Supporting the Sustainable Development Goal 4 
McGreal 
297 
 
Following a recommendation by the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie , whose 
conference was hosted in February 2013 in Moncton, NB, there has been renewed interest in Québec in 
the promotion of des ressources éducatives libres (REL). The Ministère de l'Éducation, du Loisir et du 
Sport du Québec is financing the website BRER (banques de ressources éducatives en réseau), which 
hosts French language OER as well as other content. Thot Cursus is another Québec organization that 
has implemented a repository that includes OER. These are rather limited initiatives, in comparison with 
the Western Canadian initiatives and with France, which is strongly committed to REL. Sophie Touzé, 
who serves as an expert in Digital Education and Pedagogy for the French Ministry of Higher Education 
and Research, has been elected president of the international Open Education Consortium.  
It is not well known that MOOCs are Canadian in origin. The name da tes to an experimental course led by 
George Siemens at the University of Manitoba and Stephen Downes at the National Research Council in 
2008 (Tamburri, 2014). They taught a MOOC titled, Connectivism and Connective Knowledge (Downes 
& Siemens, 2008) with more than 2,200 learners online. 
The Canada -based Commonwealth of Learning (COL) is charged with promoting open education 
throughout the 53 countries of the Commonwealth. They have been supporting OER and delivering 
MOOCs to Commonwealth citizens since 2013 . In 2017, in collaboration with Athabasca University, they 
are delivering a MOOC entitled, Introduction to Technology Enabled Learning, which is accessible 
globally. Several of Canada's larger universities have been delivering MOOCs as part of the Courser a or 
EdX consortia based in the USA. As an example, The University of Alberta delivered one of the first such 
MOOCs in Canada on Dinosaur Paleobiology in 2013.  
The International Development Research Centre continues to be very active in supporting OER res earch. 
They are the donor (C$2.8 million) for The Researching Open Educational Resources for Development 
(ROER4D) project, which is a South -South research network on OER and development. This network, 
with participants in South America, Asia, and Africa is  charged with analysing and producing knowledge 
on the impact of OER in higher education. A previous project in Asia has led to major OER initiatives in 
several countries (International Development Research Centre [IDRC], 2017) 
Open Access (OA) to scholarl y research is related to OER. Open Access supports open licensing for 
research rather than education. Nevertheless, OA can be used as OER, if the open content is used in a 
teaching/learning context. The three Canadian research funding agencies —CIHR, NSERC, and SSHRC—
have agreed on a policy supporting open access in scholarly publications.  OA initiatives also include 
support for OA Journals. The SSHRC and UNESCO supported International Review of Research in Open 
and Distributed Learning (IRRODL)  was one of the first open journals worldwide. There is also support 
for open university presses such as AUPress at Athabasca University and limited open titles from the 
University of Ottawa Press  and others. Universities are also promoting openness through the use of  
Creative Commons (CC) licences.  
To move forward as international leaders, Canadian OER supporters must continue to increase awareness 
of OER among learners, teachers, administrators, and most importantly, among provincial education 
officials who are in a  position to support open policies including those responsible for the CMEC. 
Specifically, provinces should be encouraged to build on the Tri -Council decision to support open access 
[PAGE 7]
Special Report on the Role of Open Educational Resources in Supporting the Sustainable Development Goal 4 
McGreal 
298 
 
for research and extend it to OER in both higher education and in the scho ols. The experience of Alberta 
shows that students, concerned about the increasing price of textbooks, can have a significant impact on 
government policies regarding OER. Leadership is enjoyed by those who are actually implementing OER 
initiatives. The imp lementation of open education in Canada remains in its early stages. However, the 
growing interest in MOOCs, the recent OER initiatives, and the inter -provincial partnership MOU in 
Western Canada, could well be harbingers of future cooperative and/or colla borative developments in 
Canada, placing it as a leading nation on a fast track to national and international collaborations, policy, 
and standards in open education. 
 
OER: Opportunities and Challenges 
Perhaps the most important opportunity for OER is in t he global free exchange of knowledge. OER render 
this knowledge not only accessible but also reusable by learners and teachers in a variety of formats; 
anyone can access information on the Web, but if it is restrictively licensed, it cannot be downloaded o r 
reused, whereas OER does allow this. In addition (as previously noted), OER are very much “in sync” with 
the “participatory principle” noted in diverse Indigenous communities and so can provide Indigenous 
organisations with an opportunity to support the distribution and preservation of their cultures and 
Indigenous knowledge (Bertini, 2010). OER have also made possible a move towards South -South 
exchanges, whereas previously knowledge flowed uni -directionally from the North to the South. For 
example, luso phone learners in Brazil are accessing Portuguese language OER created by the African 
Virtual University (Diallo, 2011). 
Any implementation of OER becomes an opportunity that presents challenges. OER can save time and 
money, but as has been noted above, th e implementation does not come without costs both one -time and 
recurring. One -time costs include those of searching, transferring, adapting, assembling, etc., while the 
recurring costs are for the infrastructure and updating. Note, that there are similar c osts when 
implementing commercial content. Many teachers and learners still do not understand the difference 
between freely accessible content on the internet and OER, believing that all web resources are OER 
(Chen & Panda, 2013). 
However, most available O ER are in English. This can be seen as both an opportunity and a challenge as 
the English language is widespread as a first or second language in most countries, counting hundreds of 
millions of speakers, but it is still not understood by the vast majority  of the world's people. Another 
major challenge for OER advocates is to overcome what has been seen as a unilingual and one -directional 
flow of knowledge and resources from the global North to the South (Glennie, Harley, Burcher, & van 
Wyk, 2012), often referred to as “cultural imperialism,” based on an unequal distribution of power.   
A most serious challenge for the global South, and in underserved remote regions in the global North is 
the lack of infrastructure. This includes not only available devices b ut also access to high bandwidth either 
by wire or wireless. Nevertheless, more than 90% of the world's population is within range of effective 
wireless signals, which raises opportunities for learning using mobile device (M -learning). The demand 
for a mob ile learning can be used to convince governments of the importance of providing an adequate, 
[PAGE 8]
Special Report on the Role of Open Educational Resources in Supporting the Sustainable Development Goal 4 
McGreal 
299 
 
reasonably priced infrastructure to elevate the educational level of citizens.  
The increasing volume of OER that are becoming available represents an opportunity for teachers and 
learners everywhere. On the other hand, this increasing volume has created a serious challenge in the 
effort that is often required to find and evaluate relevant OER (Chen & Panda). However, this is becoming 
less of a barrier in the first year of higher education, as more robust and capable search engines and OER 
repositories are becoming available for searching out content in the major subject areas. In less popular 
subjects and in the upper levels of university, finding relevant OER still  remains problematic. 
OER can also be used to raise the quality of education, not only of the teaching content but also of the 
teaching itself by supporting the transformation of the educator’s learning environment. Nevertheless, 
quality issues have been r aised regarding the use of OER. Criticisms include not just subject matter 
quality, but quality in relation to the local environment, culture, and pedagogy. However, unlike 
commercial content that must remain static and untouched, OER can be localised and customised to the 
specific environment and to different approaches to learning. They can also be formatted for delivery in a 
variety of ways including print form, when needed. In India, the National Knowledge Commission (NKC) 
has recognized that OER can be  used to address the poor quality of teachers, poor infrastructure, poor 
libraries, and poor educational resources. They recommend that OER can be very effective in reducing 
these problems and improving the quality of education while increasing accessibili ty (Dutta, 2016)  
There are an increasing number of OER and MOOC initiatives being implemented internationally. To 
date, most projects have been in North America and Europe; however, important exceptions include 
Siyavula and the African Virtual University (AVU) in South Africa, the Indian NKC OER initiative, and 
several universities in Asia. There is research on several of these initiatives, their impact on th e demand 
for OER, and on their reuse. Lessons can be learned from these and also from research on activities in the 
more developed countries (Das, 2011; Dhanarajan & Porter 2013; Dutta, 2016).  
 
MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses) 
There are huge educational  benefits becoming available through MOOCs. These are not limited to 
significant cost savings, which can be substantial, because they can also provide worldwide access to high -
quality learning content with at least vicarious interactions with experienced i nstructors. This combined 
with anytime, anywhere learning, make MOOCs, combined with OER, a valuable and significant factor in 
meeting the United Nations and UNESCO's educational goal. While providing access to learning for large 
numbers of learners, MOOCs  have become instrumental in the transformation by institutions to more 
technologically enhanced learning, improving the quality of both online and blended learning. On the 
other hand, MOOCs have been criticised for the quality of their pedagogy, relying o n traditional video 
lecture formats; their low completion rates; and a failure to deliver on inclusive and equitable quality 
education (Darco, Rosewell, & Kear, 2016) 
MOOCs represent a major opportunity for meeting the Quality Education goal. However, they  also 
present serious challenges. MOOCs cannot be seen as a solution for all (like classroom -based teaching, 
[PAGE 9]
Special Report on the Role of Open Educational Resources in Supporting the Sustainable Development Goal 4 
McGreal 
300 
 
which is not for all and has its own challenges). MOOCs are being used by many institutions solely as a 
marketing tool. Moreover, to date, MOOCs ar e mostly being accessed by those with higher levels of 
education rather than the masses of learners who lack access to traditional education (Rohs & Ganz, 
2015). It is argued that MOOCs are simply extending the digital divide by expanding inequalities of 
opportunity. In addition, other barriers can be insurmountable for many learners. These include 
information overload, lack of local language support, and access to well -trained teaching professionals. 
Educators must find new strategies for addressing the ne eds of these non -traditional learners.  
Nevertheless, MOOCs can be used to improve educational quality while massifying the educational 
market. Haber (2014) cautions that just because they are not a cure -all does not mean that MOOCs are 
not important in promoting quality education – despite their limitations. 
The future of MOOCs will depend on approaches taken to accreditation. Students not only want to learn 
but also want their learning recognized officially. The OERu is attempting to remedy this with their  OER 
courses and testing by the participating universities (for a fee) for students who want a credential. Several 
MOOCs now offer certificates while others offer badges. Automated testing and prior learning assessment 
will play a key role in supporting credentialing as MOOCs become more popular. 
MOOCs have the potential to open up education to many more students at substantially lower costs. 
Scholarships can be awarded to students who monitor other students in MOOCs. The world economy is 
digital and students can learn to help each other online and become proficient digital citizens. MOOCs are 
capable of being used to reach large numbers of teachers anywhere at any time and are in fact benefiting 
from this now.  For example, The Commonwealth of Learning and Athabasca University are delivering 
Technology Enabled Learning training via a MOOC to large numbers of learners, many of whom are in the 
least developed countries or on small island states. 
 
UNESCO/COL Chair in OER and Awareness Training 
The full potential of OER and their MOOC offspring can be realised with executive commitments and the 
approval of strong open education policies, along with the implementation of appropriate technologies 
(Miao, Mishra, & McGreal, 2016). These measures should be combined with training for knowledge about 
OER and the skills to effectively use them. These include expanding awareness of OER and MOOCs; the 
integration of OER into institutional administrative frameworks; and developing and applying sustainable 
OER business models, including faculty incentives (Cox & Trotter, 2016).  
The role of the UNESCO/COL/ICDE Chair in OER is to continue lobbying for OER initiativ es and policies 
among the relevant constituencies (School Boards, Higher Educational Institutions, Ministries of 
Education and Advance Education, faculty, students, etc.) in Canada and internationally, particularly in 
the global South, in order to expand p articipation and extend access. The Chair must lead by example by 
collaborating on OER projects with other Canadian and international educators and researchers, as well 
as those in his home institution. He has a role also in advising administrators and gov ernment officials in 
how best to implement OER initiatives, including quality assurance and issues of privacy and ethics 
[PAGE 10]
Special Report on the Role of Open Educational Resources in Supporting the Sustainable Development Goal 4 
McGreal 
301 
 
(Ferguson, Scanlon, & Harris, 2016, p.21). The creation of templates, standards, and guidelines for OER 
implementations and use are also important activities that are being undertaken. 
Success builds on success. The Chair in OER has been instrumental in supporting BC's initial leap into 
OER; was heavily involved with students in the lobbying of the Alberta government to support OER, 
resulting in a $2 million grant; and was named co -Chair of the Alberta OER initiative. His efforts have 
had some (if limited) influence in Ontario where he has advised Ministry and eCampus Ontario officials 
on OER. Internationally, universities in Malaysia, Pak istan, India, the Philippines, South Africa, Uruguay, 
Bahrain, and other countries, have all benefitted from OER consultations with the Chair, resulting in 
many responding with significant OER initiatives. The role of the Chair, then is to support OER 
implementations wherever possible. 
 
OER: Advancing Sustainable Development Goal 4? 
Ensure Inclusive and Equitable Quality Education and Promote Lifelong Learning 
Opportunities for All 
As I have represented above, OER can be a significant aid in ensuring inclus ive and equitable quality 
education and can promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. OER, by their very nature as freely 
available and usable learning resources, can be considered important, if not essential, for supporting the 
expressed goals in a ll areas of education.  From pre -kindergarten to lifelong learning, including technical 
and vocational training, OER can have significant impact.  
Governments can better support free K12 education financially because the OER are available at no cost. 
They can be taken “as is” or modified and they can be made available to all. This includes all levels from 
early childhood to secondary school. Affordable education for vocational and technical education as well 
as university is also made more affordable with O ER. MOOCs with their ability to serve large numbers of 
users can be used to increase the number of youth and adults with relevant skills. Gender disparities can 
be diminished when both men and women have equal access to the free content. People with disabi lities 
will benefit, because the OER can be adapted and reformatted to meet their individual needs. And, OER 
fit very well with the community-sharing culture of many Indigenous communities. 
One of the biggest boosts to literacy is the open availability of OER. They not only assist in promoting 
literacy education, they actually can serve as an incentive. With the world's knowledge freely available and 
re-usable, this provides a reason for people to become literate and numerate, not to mention technology 
literate. 
OER can be used to help ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to promote 
sustainable development, including, among others, through education for sustainable development and 
sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equal ity, promotion of a culture of peace and non -violence, 
global citizenship and appreciation of cultural diversity, and of culture’s contribution to sustainable 
development. OER can be child, disability, and gender sensitive, and provide safe, nonviolent, in clusive, 
[PAGE 11]
Special Report on the Role of Open Educational Resources in Supporting the Sustainable Development Goal 4 
McGreal 
302 
 
and effective learning environments for all, including diverse Indigenous communities. And if not, OER 
can be altered and or modified to be so. 
 
Acknowledgments 
This paper was made possible by a grant from the Canadian Commission for UNESCO. 
 
  
 
References 
AgShare II. (2015). Agshare II OER.  Retrieved from http://oerafrica.org/agshare/ 
Bertini, G. (2010, November 16). What can the Open Educational Resources movement learn from 
Indigenous Knowledge Systems? [Blog post].   Retrieved from 
https://gfbertini.wordpress.com/2010/11/16/what-can-the-open-educational-resources-
movement-learn-from-indigenous-knowledge-systems/ 
Butcher, N., Kanwar, A., & Uvalic-Trumbic, S. (2015). A basic guide to open educational resources (OER) 
[eBook].  Retrieved from http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-
information/resources/publications-and-communication-materials/publications/full-list/a-
basic-guide-to-open-educational-resources-oer/  
Butcher, N., & Hoosen, S. (2012). Exploring the business case for Open Educational Resources. Retrieved 
from http://www.col.org/resources/publications/Pages/detail.aspx?PID=421   
Chen, Q., & Panda, S. (2013). Needs for and utilisation of OER in distance education: A Chinese survey. 
Education Media Internationl, 50(2). Retrieved from 
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/09523987.2013.795324  
Council of Ministers of Education Canada. (2012, July 6). Ministers of Education mark a milestone in 
education cooperation [Blog post].   Retrieved from http://www.cmec.ca/278/Press-
Releases/Press-Releases-Detail/Ministers-of-Education-Mark-a-Milestone-in-Education-
Cooperation-.html?id_article=508 
[PAGE 12]
Special Report on the Role of Open Educational Resources in Supporting the Sustainable Development Goal 4 
McGreal 
303 
 
Cox, G., & Trotter, H. (2016). Institutional culture and OER policy: How structure, culture, and agency 
mediate OER policy potential in South African universities. IRRODL, 17(5). Retrieved from 
http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/2523 
Daniel, J. (2012, February 1). Invest in clicks not bricks5th eLEX Conference. Hamdan Bin -Mohamed 
eUniversity: Commonwealth of Learning [PDF]. Retrieved from 
http://oasis.col.org/bitstream/handle/11599/1096/2012_Daniel_Clicks_Bricks_Transcript.pdf?
sequence=1&isAllowed=y  
Darco, J., Rosewell, J., & Kear, K. (2016, August 12). Quality frameworks for MOOCs. In M. Jemni, 
Kinshuk, & M. K. Khribi (Eds.), Open education from OER to MOOCs. Springer. Retrieved from 
http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-662-52925-6_14  
Das, A. K. (2011). Emergence of open educational resources (OER) in India and its impact on lifelong 
learning. Library Hi Tech News. Retrieved from 
http://www.emeraldinsight.com/doi/abs/10.1108/07419051111163848  
Dhanarajan, G., & Porter, D. (Eds.). (2013). Open educational resources: An Asian perspective: 
Commonwealth of Learning. Retrieved from http://oasis.col.org/handle/11599/23  
Diallo, B. (2011, May 4). Emerging open courseware projects: AVU Teacher Education Program 
[SlideShare presentation].   Retrieved from 
https://www.slideshare.net/OCWConsortium/emerging-open-courseware-projects-bakary-
diallo-avu  
Dutta, I. (2016). Open Educational Resources (OER): Opportunities and challenges for Indian higher 
education. Turkish Journal of Distance Education, 17(2). 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.17718/tojde.34669  
Downes, S., & Siemens, G. (2008). Connectivism and connective knowledge [Blog post]. The Daily 
Archives. Retrieved from http://connect.downes.ca/archive/08/09_15_thedaily.htm  
Ferguson, R., Scanlon, E., & Harris, L. (2016). Developing a strategic approach to MOOCs. Journal of 
Interactive Media in Education.(1). Retrieved from http://doi.org/10.5334/jime.439  
Glennie, J., Harley, K., Butcher, N., & van Wyk, T. (2012). Open educational resources and change in 
higher education: Reflections from practice [eBook]. Retrieved from 
http://oasis.col.org/handle/11599/80  
Government of Canada. (2016, December 21). Tri-agency open access policy on publications [Blog post].  
Retrieved from 
http://www.science.gc.ca/eic/site/063.nsf/eng/h_F6765465.html?OpenDocument   
Haber, J. (2014). MOOCs. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
[PAGE 13]
Special Report on the Role of Open Educational Resources in Supporting the Sustainable Development Goal 4 
McGreal 
304 
 
International Development Research Centre (IDRC). (2017). Open educational  resources. Retrieved from 
https://www.idrc.ca/en/search/gss/open%20educational%20resources   
Mackintosh, W., McGreal, R., & Taylor, J. (2011). Open education resources (OER) for assessment and 
credit for students project: Towards a logic model and plan for action [PDF] .  Retrieved from 
http://hdl.handle.net/2149/3039  
McGreal, R., Anderson, T., & Conrad, D. (2015). Open educational resources in Canada 2015. 
International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 16 (5). Retrieved from 
http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/2404  
McGreal, R., Mackintosh, W., & Taylor, J. (2013). Open educational resources university: An assessment 
and credit for students initiative In R. McGreal, W. Kinutha, & S. Marshall (Eds.), Open 
educational resources: Innovation research and practice. Vancouver: Commonwealth of 
Learning. Retrieved from http://www.col.org/PublicationDocuments/pub_PS_OER-
IRP_web.pdf  
Memorandum of Understanding Open Educational Resources. (2014, March 13).   Retr ieved from 
http://www.gov.sk.ca/adx/aspx/adxGetMedia.aspx?mediaId=f3d342c4-ab61-44a4-9f96-
71ceb7810a5d&PN=Shared  
Miao, F., Mishra, S., & McGreal, R. (2016). Open educational resources: Policy, costs and transformation  
[eBook].  Retrieved from http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002443/244365e.pdf  
Rohs, M., & Ganz, M. (2015). MOOCs and the claim for education for all: A disillusion by empirical data. . 
International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 16 (6). Retrieved from 
http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/2033  
Rossini, C., & Castro, O. (2016). The state of open educational resources in Brazil: Policies and realities. In 
F. Miao, S. Mishra & R. McGreal (Eds.), Open educational resources: Policy, costs and 
transformation. Vancouver: Commonwealth of Learning/UNESCO. Retrieved from 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002443/244365e.pdf  
Tamburri, R. (2014, February 12). An interview with Canadian MOOC pioneer George Siemens. 
University Affairs. Retrieved from http://www.universityaffairs.ca/features/feature-article/an-
interview-with-canadian-mooc-pioneer-george-siemens/ 
UNESCO. (2002). Forum on the Impact of Open Courseware for Higher Educatio n in Developing 
Countries: Final Report. Retrieved from 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001285/128515e.pdf  
 UNESCO. (2012). UNESCO Paris Declaration on Open Educational Resources [PDF].  Retrieved from 
http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/Events/Paris%20OER%2
0Declaration_01.pdf  
[PAGE 14]
Special Report on the Role of Open Educational Resources in Supporting the Sustainable Development Goal 4 
McGreal 
305 
 
Weller, M. (2014). The battle for open: How openness won and why it doesn’t feel like victory. London: 
Ubiquity Press. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5334/bam 
Wiley, D. (2014, March 5). The access compromise and the 5th R [Blog post].   Retrieved from 
https://opencontent.org/blog/archives/3221  
Yuan, L., & Powell, S. (2013, March). MOOCs and open education: Implications for higher education 
[Blog post].  Retrieved from http://publications.cetis.org.uk/2013/667
