[PAGE 1]
International Education Studies; V ol. 8, No. 1; 2015 
ISSN 1913-9020 E-ISSN 1913-9039 
Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education 
152 
 
The Integration of Environmental Education in Science Materials by 
Using MOTORIC Learning Model 
I Wayan Sukarjita1, Muhammad Ardi2, Abdul Rachman2, Amiruddin Supu1 & Gufran Darma Dirawan2 
1 Faculty of Education, Nusa Cendana University, Indonesia 
2 Department of Environment Education, Post Graduate Programs, Makassar State University, Indonesia 
Correspondence: I Wayan Sukarjita, Post Graduate Programs, Makassar State University, Indonesia. E-mail: 
wayansukarjita@yahoo.co.id 
 
Received: September 26, 2014   A ccepted: November 3, 2014   Onlin e Published: December 30, 2014 
doi:10.5539/ies.v8n1p152            URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/ies.v8n1p152 
 
Abstract 
The research of the integration of Environmental Education in science subject matter by application of MOTORIC 
Learning models has carried out on Junior High School Kupang Nusa Tenggara Timur Indonesia. MOTORIC 
learning model is a Environmental  Education (EE) learning model that colla borate three learning approach i.e. 
character approach, contextual  and multimedia approaches. MOTORIC consists of seven components which 
constitute the acronym namely: Motivation, Observation, Talking, Orientation, Reinforcement, Implementation 
and Confirmation. The purpose of this research is to improve the junior high school students’ knowledge about the 
environment. Futhermore, the study was carried out in Fe bruary-May 2014, with a sample of class VII students 
of junior high school in Kupang Indonesia. Environmental education materials are integrated in this study 
include energy, living sustem, pollution, waste management and conservation. Data was measured by using 
multiple choice test of environmental knowledge. The data were analyzed using the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test. 
The results showed at 95% confidence level ( α = 0.05), the integration of Environmental Education materials in 
science subject matter of junior high school through application of MOTORIC learning models effectively 
improve students’ knowledge of the environment by 64.15% in large groups of students meanwhile 68.07% in 
small group of students. 
Keywords: environmental, education, MOTORIC, model, science 
1. Introduction 
Nature is a source of life for humans. Therefore, ma n cannot escape from the reliance by nature and the 
environment. To meet all the requirements (needs) and desires (wants), then humans explore natural resources 
excessively without being followed by remediation measures or rehabilitation of natural resources. Environmental 
degradation becomes result of community behavior and co mmunity attitude in managing their environment. The 
fact is, many phenomena of environmental change in recent years have become an event that jolted our thinking. 
Some unfortunate events caused by environmental degradation caused community to think backwards and connect 
the incident with the educational process. For example: deforestation causes erosion, floods and landslides that 
resulted in a lot of human casualties due to the avalanche of soil, the problem of air pollution in large cities due to 
the heavy use of motor vehicles, water and soil pollution, the attitude of people who still throw waste and littering 
the land, global warming, greenhouse effect and many others phenomena that portrait of environmental 
degradation. From this fact, it is needed community awareness to protect nature that has limitations and should be 
preserved for the continuation of existence of mankind in the future. 
One effort that can be done by the government to prevent and save the environment at an early stage is to involve 
children from an early age in caring and loving environment. This can be done either through formal, non-formal 
and informal educational basis. Moreover, in formal edu cation, efforts to recognize and cherish the environment 
can begin to introduce to students some of the terms a ssociated with the environm ent. Environment Knowledge 
is needed to be implanted since early childhood with th e hope that this knowledge will be the foundation for 
students to be even behaved positively towards the environment. Associated with this statement, Hendrawati 
(2009) states that childhood  is a critical period as the future generation in the future. If knowledge is embedded 
in the way childhood is true, can be expected when he reaches adol escence and adulthood, the stock of 
[PAGE 2]
www.ccsenet.org/ies International Edu cation Studies V ol. 8, No. 1; 2015 
153 
 
knowledge, understanding and attitude formation during childhood will bring enormous positive effect that will 
affect their lives. 
Introduction to the ecosystem, habitat and community livelihoods in the junior high and even elementary school 
students should gradually from planting of knowledge about the environment. By simplifying introduced the 
ecosystem knowledge that related to the community, the nature, the phenomena of the nature and community 
expectations their livelihoods in the future. Knowledg e is information or intimation known or recognized by 
someone. Furthermore, Soekanto (2003) also explains that knowledge is the impression in the minds of men as a 
result of his senses and different users with conf idence (beliefs), superstitions, and enlightened wrong 
(misinformation). 
In another sense, knowledge is a variety of symptoms encountered and acquired through observation of human 
senses. Knowledge arises when someone uses the senses or his reason to recognize certain objects or events that 
have never seen or felt before. Knowledge is information that has been combined with the understanding and the 
potential for further action, which is then attached to one’s mind. In addition, Notoatmodjo (2007) also explains 
that knowledge can be interpreted as the result of human sensing of objects through the senses of its senses of 
sight, hearing, smell, taste and touch at a time which in itself will generate a sensi ng knowledge. Much of the 
knowledge gained from sensing the eyes and ears. It is greatly influenced by one’s knowledge and perception of 
the intensity of the attention object which is a guide in shaping attitudes even one’s actions. 
In general, knowledge of the predictive ability of something as a result of recognition of a particular form of 
pattern s. Knowledge arises when someone uses the senses or cultural sense to explore an object, event or form 
specific patterns that have never seen or felt before. Person ’s ability to use his senses to recognize an object or a 
specific incident different from each other, depending on the sensitivity and intensity of sensory stimuli received 
one. Therefore, it has a level of knowledge and level of intensity as part of a process of thought if someone on the 
observed object or event. Accordingly, Bloom and Kratwohl (1956) as quoted by Rusman (2012) classifies 
knowledge as cognitive domains (cognitive) in six aspects or levels of thinking processes, ranging from the lowest 
level to the highest level. The sixth level or aspect in question is (1) knowledge (C1); (2) comprehension (C2); (3) 
Applications (C3); (4) Analysis (C4); (5) Synthesis (C5) and (6) evaluation (C6). 
The sixth level of knowledge of the above, then by Anderson (2001) revised by changing the form of the noun 
into a verb, as well as a change in the level of the fifth and sixth. According to Anderson (2001) as cited in 
Rohmad (2012) that the cognitive domains has six aspects or levels of thinking processes ranging from the 
Remembering (C1), Understanding (C2), Applying (C3), Analyzing (C4), Evaluating (C5) to the level of the 
highest thought process that is Creating (C6). 
The Research in an effort to raise awareness of environmental preservation for junior high school students had 
conducted by Puspandari (2008) by  applying Contextual Teaching and Learning (CTL) in the learning of 
Population and Environment Education by sample is Junior High Schools students in Balikpapan, South 
Kalimantan. The results of research show that, (1) In Population and Environment Education learning, students 
need to gain direct experience or at least see the real case about environmental, (2) students began to realize the 
importance of environmental sustainability, (3) application of learning model CTL in Population and 
Environment Education learning able to optimize the appearance of intellectual potential, creativity, emotional 
intelligence and student adversity (Puspandari, 2008). 
In formal education in junior high school, knowledge about the environment can be provided to students, among 
others, through the Environmental Education (EE) lessons. Environmental Education (EE) is the activity in the 
field of environmental education organized by schools, consisting of elementary education, secondary education 
and higher education and is done in a structured and tiered. According Arianto (1988) that the Environmental 
Education (EE) teaching through formal education can be achieved through two approaches, namely:  
(1) monolithic approach, the Environmental Education (EE) as a stand-alone subject in line with other subjects, (2) 
an integrative approach, which combines or unites Environmental Education (EE) material into a particular subject, 
for example in science lessons. However, when it sis re ferring to the concept of ESD (Education for Sustainable 
Development) then Environmental Education in formal learning for primary and secondary education done in 
integrative approach (Deputy for Environmental Communication and Community Empowerment, Ministry of 
Environment, 2012). Associat ed with it, then if Environmental Educa tion is not listed in the curriculum for 
Environmental Education can be taught in an integrated manner on other subjects. 
Science is one of the subjects taught  in the secondary school. Science is the nature and meaning of various 
phenomena/behaviors/characteristics that are packed into a set of theories or concepts through the scientific 
process by humans. Theory or concept is organized into an inspiration for the creation of technology that is utilized 
[PAGE 3]
www.ccsenet.org/ies International Edu cation Studies V ol. 8, No. 1; 2015 
154 
 
for human life (Mariana, 2009). Science in the Junior High Schools include; material of physics, chemistry and 
biology. 
When a teacher wishes to integrate the Environmental E ducation materials into scie nce materials, will arise a 
question, “how to integrate EE into science learning ef fectively and practicaly?” Effective and practical implies 
that the model is applicable not inte rfere with subject matter that is scie nce, but easily insert environmental 
education materials into the learning process. On this o ccasion, the authors introduce a learning model that can 
be used in learning are integrated EE in science learning. This model is named MOTORIC which stands for 
Motivation, Observation, Talking, Orientation, Rein forcement, Implementation and Confirmation that shows 
seven components of learning process in this model. The learning model is based on the third approach is the 
approach of learning EE character, cont extual and multimedia refers to the theories of behaviorism, in which 
learning is a change in behavior as a result of the in teraction between stimulus and response. According to this 
theory, the most important is the input in the form of stimulus and the output in the form of response. 
The MOTORIC Learning is essentially a study designed to combine several strategies and learning approach that 
is now being referred to as a learning approach that pr ioritizes active students to think, be factual, bold 
expression, and is able to implement the knowledge obtained by students in the learning process in the form of 
positive attitude in social life. MOTORIC stand for several aksioma i.e. Motivation, Observation, Talking, 
Orientation, Reinforcement, Implementation and Reflection depicting the seven components of learning that 
characterizes MOTORIC learning. MOTORIC learning model is applied in the learning environment is based on 
three learning approach, which is environmentally approach to the character, contextual learning and multimedia 
learning as the application of techno logy in learning. The three approaches, which approaches the character, and 
the contextual approach to learning multimedia forms of learning approach es appropriate and in line with the 
five learning component in the curriculum in 2013, are watching, asking, gather information, associating and 
communicating. 
Character is a learning approach that is more about the attitude that characterizes eac h individual student. As 
Rohman (2012) explains that the character is a way of thinking, attitude and behavior that is characteristic of 
each individual to live and work togeth er, both within the family, community, nation and state. The character of 
individual is an individual who can make decisions and be ready to account for every effect and the decision he 
made. Character education is a plus ch aracter education, ie education that involves aspects of cognitive, feeling 
and action. Without these three aspects, it will not be effective character education. 
Contextual approach is a concept whic h helps teachers link between the lear ning materials taught students with 
real-world situations and encourage students to make connections between the knowledge possessed by its 
application in their lives as family members, citizen s and workers (Komalasari, 2011). Meanwhile, the concept 
of a multimedia approach that underlies the MOTORIC model this is learning environment that seek to present 
factual issues concerning environmental audio-visual equipment. One goal is for the student brought in a sense 
of real-world environmental problems associated with that display. Environmental Education learning cannot be 
separated from the role of the media, especially the four media, visual media, audio-visual media, media people 
and media settings. Impressions through photographs and audio-visual recordings of how sengasaranya people 
who lived in the stricken region where floods, landslides, droughts and crop failure due to water sultry as the 
impact of a green area that serves as a water catchment has been broken and the like events, is expected to arouse 
feelings (feeling) students to help preserve the enviro nment. Media especially multimedia, according to research 
Hussein (2010) can motivate students to behave and act. 
Chosen character, contextual and multimedia approach as learning concepts underlying MOTORIC models of 
learning, because according to the curriculum 2013 expect ations as set out by the Minister of Education and 
Culture of the Republic of Indonesia Number 65 Year 2013 About Standard of Process Primary and Secondary 
Education, that the learning objectives in the New curriculum 2013 include the development of the realm of 
attitudes, knowledge and skills elaborated in every educational unit of learning. In addition, the third domain has 
a trajectory acquisition of competence or  different psychological processes. The attitude is gained through the 
activities of learners “receive, run, respect, appreciate, and practice”. Knowledge gained through the activity of 
“remembering, understanding, applying, analyzing, evaluating, development. Meanwhile learners acquired skills 
through activity “observe, ask, try, reason, describe, a nd create”. The third characteristic differences and their 
sphere of competence acquisiti on trajectory participate aff ect the characteristics of the standard process. To 
strengthen the scientific approach, thematic integrated (i nter thematic subjects), and thematic (in the subject) it 
needs to be designed and implemented an innovative lear ning to encourage the achievement of a balance of 
competence attitudes, knowledge and skills. The MOTORIC learning model is one alternative learning 
innovation to achieve the intended purpose. Therefore, to  achieve a balance of student attitudes and knowledge 
[PAGE 4]
www.ccsenet.org/ies International Edu cation Studies V ol. 8, No. 1; 2015 
155 
 
about the environment in learning environment, then this MOTORIC learning concept which refers to input a 
positive character to the environment-science subject through contextual learning by using multimedia learning. 
The MOTORIC learning model has seven components learning, namely: 
(1) Motivation, the teachers motivate their students in the learning process activity apperception appropriate 
subject matter in the classroom environment will be di scussed. At this stage th e teacher motivates through 
questions or statements that provoke interest students to feel interested in following the topic material that will be 
submitted by teachers. Phase motivation is actually very close to the next stage of the observation stage. 
(2) Observation, the students make observations directly or indirectly related to environmental topics to be 
discussed. Direct observation is the observation by di rectly observe to the environmental topics that will 
discussed (outside the classroom). While the indirect observation is the observation can been done through the 
use of multimedia that has been prepared in advance by the teacher. 
(3) Talking, the students form groups and discuss appropriat e discussion guide has been prepared teachers. 
Teachers act as facilitators for each group discussion. The result of the discu ssion then briefly presented by each 
group. 
(4) Orientation, the teacher directed that the conclusion of the discussion groups according to subject matter that 
is being discussed. In the orientation phase, the teacher’s role a bit more dominant than the students, the goal that 
the conclusions made in strict accord ance with the concept of the material covered during the learning takes 
place. 
(5) Reinforcement, Reinforcement is done primarily to provid e teachers with the knowledge and the related 
strengthening of environmental attitudes of students. 
(6) Implementation, the students implement what they have learned at the meeting in attitude in daily life and in 
social life. This implementation is more geared to fo stering positive attitudes of students in maintaining and 
preserving the surrounding environment. At this stage,  students implement the material in the life of the 
surrounding environment through Attitude Implementati on Guide (AIG) of environmental prepared by the 
teachers. Implementation of a positive a ttitude towards the environment can be done starting from a small scope 
like cleanliness class, school yard to residence students. 
(7) Confirmation, at the end of the activity, the teacher always reminds students to always be positive towards 
environmental conservation efforts. 
2. Research and Methods 
The research of implementation MOTORIC model was conducted in April-May 2014 at a class VII student of 
Junior High School 13 Kupang Indonesia. The test is done twice, i.e in small groups totaling 12 students and large 
groups totaling 21 students. Before the trial experiment, the researcher conducted pre-test to determine students’ 
prior knowledge about the environment. The implementation of MOTORIC model on a small group of samples is 
done by inserting environmental messages on key words science lessons that can be attributed to the 
environment. The effectiveness and practicality of the mode l is indicated by an increa se in students’ knowledge 
about the environment. The steps of Research and Development models approach is used pre-test before treatment 
is done, and at the end of the implementation of the model is done post-test about environmental knowledge with 
35 question items. 
The Integration of environmental education materials into  science lessons cover three topics, there are: energy, 
living system pollution, waste and conservation. Those materials are integrated environment in materials science 
with the topic of energy and system life. Analysis of data from the pre- post test knowledge environment for the 
sample group used Wilcoxon Signed Rank test (Sudjana, 2005). 
3. Results and Discussion 
Trials of integration environmental edu cation in the science material by using MOTORIC learning model on 
Junior High School had done through two-stage models. The implementation of MOTORIC model on a small 
group of samples is done by inserting environmental messages on key words science lessons that can be 
attributed to the environment. To facilitate delivering of  learning material used science books that have been 
inserted with environmental messages and picture messages of interest in accordance with the character of junior 
high school students. In addition, also be used to guide the implementation of the attitude inspires students to 
love the attitude of the environment. In order for the messages to be conveyed environment more attractive, 
multimedia is used along with the video. The seven existing learning syntax in the MOTORIC model taught as 
one-on-one integrated whole as a model of science learning but inserted with environmental messages. The 
[PAGE 5]
www.ccsenet.org/ies International Edu cation Studies V ol. 8, No. 1; 2015 
156 
 
model innovation is to emphasize to students that they basically are learning the mate rial instead of learning 
about science and the environment. However, with the inclusion of environmental messages through the 
characters approach, contextual and multimedia use their unwitting students have also been learning 
environment. 
Trials on small groups and large groups performed 5 times face to face on schedule by applies curriculum 2013 in 
the sample schools. Science material is tested with the topic of energy and lif e systems with integrated 
environmental materials include pollution, litter and conservation. At the end of the experiment trial, the researcher 
was conducted post-test, to determine how much the MOTORIC model effectiveness in improving students’ 
knowledge of the environment. Based on the results of pre-post test in a small group and the group, the data 
obtained as Table 1 below. 
 
Table 1. Pre-post test results for small and large groups’ data 
 Small groups Large groups 
Pre Post Pre Post 
Number of samples 12 12 21 21 
Means 13.8 23.3 17.0 27.9 
Minimum Value 8 18 12 20 
Maximum Value  20 30 23 33 
standard deviation 2.98 3.70 2.74 3.67 
Percentage of Improvement (%) 68.07 64.15 
 
Based on the data, as shown in Table 1 above, it appear s that the integration of material Environmental 
Education in the subject matt er of science through the MOTORIC learning model effective increase students’ 
knowledge about the environment. In a small pilot group, an increase in students’ knowledge of the environment 
before and after the application of the MOTORIC model is equal to 68.07%, while trials on large groups of 
64.15%. This suggests that environmental messages are in tegrated in science lessons were able to increase the 
students’ knowledge of environmental issues, especially  related to waste, pollution issues and environmental 
conservation issues. Increasing students ‘knowledge of the environment is expected to be a good influence on 
students’ attitudes toward the environment. 
The integration of environmental materials by MOTORIC models in science are contextual material that is part 
of the MOTORIC model, assist students in understanding the importance of the environment for students. 
Similarly, the role of instructional videos that are included in the MOTORIC model can developed sense of love 
and sympathy for the students on the en vironment. Therefore, the approach to the concept of the use of media 
characters (what is seen) would make it easier for students in recording a variety of knowledge about 
environmental issues. Increasing students’ knowledge of the environment by 68.07% in the test sample and the 
small group of 64.15% on a large test sample group indicated that the integration of environmental education 
materials through MOTORIC models in materials science of junior hi gh schools effectively increase students’ 
knowledge about the environment. 
The percentage of increase in the mean pre-post students’ knowledge of the environment after application of 
MOTORIC learning models significantly as shown by Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[PAGE 6]
www.ccsen
 
F
 
To see t h
environme
differences
were treate
 
Tabel 2. Th
 
Based on t
μw is 39 an
value of w
between t h
MOTORIC
3.  
 
et.org/ies 
Figure 1. Chart
he significan c
ental by grou p
s in the value 
ed as shown in
he Wilcoxon s
 
Pos
 P o
 Ti e
 T o
a. P
b. P
C, P
Test
 
z 
As
y
 
a. B
b. W
the analysis re
nd σw is 12.74.
wcrtitical is 14. Be
he students’ k
C learning mod
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
ts of knowledg
ce of the dif f
ps Wilcoxon 
of pre-test to 
n Table 2 and T
signed ranks te
st-Pre Negative
ositive Ranks 
es 
otal 
Post < Pre 
Post > Pre 
Post = Pre 
t Statisticsb 
ymp. Sig. (2-ta
Based on negat
Wilcoxon Sign
sults of the Wi
. Based on the
ecause the valu
knowledge of 
del. Something
Pre
Internation
ge enhancemen
ference betwe
Signed Ran k
post-test stud
Table 3. 
est for the smal
e Ranks 
ailed) 
tive ranks 
ed Rank Test
ilcoxon Signed
se values obta
ue of wobs < wc
the environ m
g similar happ
Post P
nal Education Stu
157 
nt percentage f
een the pre-t e
k tes t. Based 
dents’ knowled
ll group 
N M
0a . 0
12b 6
0c 
12 
 
 
 
 
Post-Pre
-3.068a 
.002 
 
 
 
d Rank test, th
ained wobs is 7.
critical it can be
ment before a n
ened with a la
Pre P o
udies
for students in
est to post-t e
on the analy s
dge of the en v
Mean Rank S
00 . 0
.50 7
he value of Z =
72. Meanwhile
concluded tha
nd after the a p
arge group of t
ost
n small and larg
est knowledg e
sis of data o b
vironment as t h
Sum of Rank 
00 
78.00 
= -3.068, with n
e, for n = 12 a
at there are sign
pplication the 
test samples as
Mean
Percentage o
increase  (%)
V ol. 8, No. 1; 
 
ge groups 
e of the val u
btained signi f
he obtained r e
n = 12, the valu
at level α = 0.0
nificant differe
application o
s indicated in T
of 
)
2015 
ue of 
ficant 
esults 
ue of 
5 the 
ences 
f the 
Table 
[PAGE 7]
www.ccsenet.org/ies International Edu cation Studies V ol. 8, No. 1; 2015 
158 
 
Tabel 3. The Wilcoxon signed ranks test for the large group 
 N Mean Rank Sum of Rank 
Post-Pre Negative Ranks 0 a .00 .00 
     Positive Ranks 21 b 11.00 231.00 
     T i e s  0 c   
     Total 21   
d. Post < Pre    
e. Post > Pre    
f. Post = Pre    
Test Statisticsb    
 Post - Pre   
z -4.020 a   
Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed) .000   
   
c. Based on negative ranks    
d. Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test    
 
For the large group, we find z = -4.020. For n = 21, the value of μw is 115 and σw is 21.75. Based on these values 
obtained wobs = 27.56. Meanwhile, for n = 21 at level α = 0.05 the value of w crtitical is 59. Because the value of 
wobs < w critical it can be concluded that there are significant di fferences between the students’ knowledge of the 
environment before and after the application MOTORIC learning model. Based on two groups of samples analysis 
results indicate that the integration of environmental education materials that exist in phases MOTORIC models 
can be effective to improve students’ knowledge of the environment at the 95% confidence level (α = 0.05 level). 
The increasing students’ knowledge of the environment is expected to have an im pact on increasing students’ 
positive attitudes towards the environmen t. As the result of research conducted by Masmuddin (2011) with a 
sample of Junior High Schools at Pamboang District of Pamboang, Majene West Sulawesi shows that there is a 
positive relationship between students’ environmental know ledge with attitude against environmental hygiene. 
Therefore, the integration of environmental education materials on junior high school science lessons through the 
MOTORIC learning model practicaly and effectively applied to embed and enhance the student’s knowledge 
about environment. 
4. Conclusion 
Based on the analysis and discussion as described above, it can be concluded as follows:  
Integration of environmental education materials can be done through the application of MOTORIC learning 
models.  
Integration of environmental education materials on junior high school science lessons through the application of 
MOTORIC learning models in the sample small group test of students were able to increase the knowledge about 
the environment amounted to 68.07%, while the large group of test samples was 64.15%.  
Accordingly, it can be said that the integration of environmental education materials on junior high school science 
lessons through the application of MOTORIC learning models can increasing the students’ knowledge about the 
environment. 
Acknowledgements 
Thank you submitted to: (1) Prof. Dr. Gufran D. Dirawan, M.EMD as Chairman of Departemen of Environment 
Education, Post Graduate Programs, Makassar State University, Indonesia who have given permission to conduct 
research, (2) Prof. Muhammad Ardi as a promoter, (3) Dr. Abdul Rahman as Co Promoter 1 and (4) Dr. 
Amirudiin Supu, S.Pd., M.Si as Co Promoter 2 which has guided the development of proposals for research to 
take place. Thanks are also submitted to the Graduate Program of Makassar State Un iversity who has provided 
administrative facilities during the research process. 
[PAGE 8]
www.ccsenet.org/ies International Edu cation Studies V ol. 8, No. 1; 2015 
159 
 
References 
Arianto, I. (1988). Population and Environmental Education at the Teachers’ Training College . Jakarta: 
Department of Education, Director ate of Higher Education, the Di rectorate General of Primary and 
Secondary Education. 
Deputy for Environmental Communication and Community Empowerment. (2012). Guideline Development 
Outline the Content Material of Environmental Education. Jakarta: Ministry of Environment. 
Hendrawati, S. (2009). Environmental Education and Its Application in Education for Elementary School Students. 
Research papers: Environmental Education . Retrieved from http://erma.st udent.umm.ac.id/download-as- 
pdf/umm_ article_10.pdf, accessed January 24, 2013 
Hussein, G. (2010). The Attitudes of Undergraduate St udents towards Motivation and Technology in a Foreign 
Language Classroom. International Journal of Learning and Teaching, 2 (2), 14-24. Retrieved from 
http://www.world-education-center.org/index.php/ijlt/article/viewFile/354/pdf_62 
Komalasari, K. (2011). Contextual Learning, Concepts and Applications. Bandung: PT. Refika Aditama. 
Mariana Alit and Praginda Wandy. (2009). Natural Science Education . Bandung: Centre for Development and 
Empowerment of Teachers and Education Personnel Natural Sciences. 
Masmuddin, K. (2011). Relationship between Students’ Environmental Knowledge with Students’ Attitudes 
toward School Environmental Hygiene Junior High School N 4 Pamboang Majene, West Sulawesi province 
(Thesis, Not Published, State University of Makassar). 
Notoatmodjo, S. (2007). Promotion of Health and Behavioral Sciences. Jakarta: Rineka Cipta. 
Puspandari. (2008). Efforts to Raise Awareness through Environmental Conservation trough Population and 
Environment Education Learning-Based Contextual Teaching and Learning. Journal of Innovative 
Education, 4(1), 28-30. 
Rohmad. (2012). Revised Bloom’ s Taxonomy . Retrieved November 16, 2013 from 
http://www4.uwsp.edu/education/lwilson/curric/ newtaxonomy.htm 
Rohman, M. (2012). Curriculum Character. Jakarta: Prestasi Pustaka. 
Rusman. (2012). Learning Models. Jakarta: Raja Grafindo Persada. 
Soekanto, S. (2003). Sociology an Introduction. Jakarta: PT. Raja Grafindo Persada. 
Sudjana. (2005). Statistical Methods. Bandung: Tarsito. 
 
Copyrights 
Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to the journal. 
This is an open-access article distributed under the te rms and conditions of the Cr eative Commons Attribution 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).
