[PAGE 1]
A bstract 
W e live in a designed w orld. STE A M  by D esign presents a 
transdisciplinary approach to learning that challenges young 
m inds w ith the task of m aking a better w orld. Learning 
today, like life, is dynam ic, connected and engaging. STE A M 
(Science, Technology, E nvironm ent, E ngineering, A rt, and 
M ath) teaching and learning integrates inform ation in 
place-based projects accessing everyday technology of 
virtual field trips, digital interactives, apps, and 
contem porary art, science and design practices. STE A M  by 
D esign develops designing m inds. D esigning m inds w ork 
across STE A M  fields developing social, cultural, 
technological, environm ental and econom ical responses to 
existing and future conditions. D esign adds A rt and the 
environm ent to the STE M  equation to contribute site 
specific, culturally connected, contributions to creative 
econom ies. D ocum ented case studies at the elem entary, 
m iddle and high school level dem onstrate the ease of 
delivering STE A M  by D esign opportunities and reveal the 
inherent creativity of students if encouraged. D esign 
cultivates new  know ledge, skills and values derived from 
becom ing aw are, developing understanding, and testing 
ideas through m aking. D esigning place-based projects, K- 
16 students acquire STE A M  aptitude and better understand 
the use of STE M  fields in solving contem porary problem s. 
A ccess to everyday technologies cultivate w ays to create, 
com m unicate and collaborate. STE A M  by D esign is 
supported by the E Learning D esignopedia, N E X T.cc, aligned 
w ith new ly released N E X T G eneration Science Standards, 
N orth A m erican A ssociation for E nvironm ental E ducation 
Standards and A rt and D esign Standards. STE A M  by D esign 
positions designing as w orld pedagogy that connects 
students as citizen activists in the com m unities in w hich 
they live and learn. 
Key w ords 
design; STE A M ; creativity; integrated learning; innovation; 
im agination 
STEA M  by D esign 
The Steam  by D esign m ovem ent m ixes art, design and the 
environm ent across traditional K-12 subjects (souse & 
Pilecki, 2013) and intertw ines the w ay artists, designers, 
and scientists research and integrate com plex sets of 
inform ation.  A t Harvard’s A rtscience Lab, M IT’s Center for 
A rts, Science, and Technology (CA ST), and at A sk N ature, 
an Internet-based biom im icry project that brings 
know ledge of the natural w orld to bear on engineering and 
design problem s, m issions turn on the successful 
integration of the arts and sciences.  Refreshing the arts 
integration efforts of the 60’s, w ith 
the inclusion of both environm ental 
concerns and design practices, 
today's integration im pacts 
contem porary K-12 STE M  education 
directly. 
Integrating design and technology 
tools into science education naturally 
offers students dynam ic learning 
opportunities. E veryday apps and 
m obile digital platform s m ake 
m oving betw een technology, 
physical m aking, w riting and 
reflecting fun. The transdisciplinary 
process utilizing existing and new 
tools represents real w orld practices 
(Standford, 2014). STE A M  by D esign 
m ixes activities integral to 
envisioning the unknow n w ith the 
know n, utilizes new  technologies, 
61 
RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
STEA M  by D esign 
Linda Keane, AIA, Professor of Architecture and Environm ental D esign, The School of 
the A rt Institute of C hicago; C o-D irector N EXT.cc ELearning D esignopedia, U SA 
M ark Keane, Professor of Architecture. The U niversity of W isconsin-M ilw aukee, U SA 
Figure 1. STEA M  by Design Based Learning Integrating A cross Subjects. 
[PAGE 2]
assesses data and probability, and engineers iterative 
solutions for testing and evaluation. M aking connections 
w ith science, technology, engineering, environm ent, art, 
and m ath, STE A M  by D esign encourages student-initiated 
and selected projects. A s a holistic approach, STE A M  by 
D esign connects learning about the natural w ith the 
constructed w orld, the social w ith the cultural, and the 
econom ical w ith the environm ental (D eKay, 2011). STE A M 
teaching now  aligns w ith N orth A m erican A ssociation for 
E nvironm ental E ducation Standards (2006), new  N ational 
A rt Standards (2014) and N E XT G eneration Science 
Standards (2014). 
D esign and science m ake use of each other’s 
m ethodologies. The interplay betw een the design body of 
know ledge and the science body of know ledge m agnifies 
results w hen both inform  investigation and propositioning. 
The processes intertw ine w hen interrelationships and 
connections betw een fields influence, disrupt, and inform 
life system s. W hile both science and design focus on the 
convergent study of particulars, they both are also 
inform ed by the divergent study of relationships across 
expanded fields. This dynam ic flow  opens linear thinking to 
unexpected innovations. D esign offers an ever-evolving set 
of activities that challenge K-12 students to integrate w hat 
they are learning in disciplinary classes into real w orld 
transdisciplinary applications. STE A M  by D esign equips 
students w ith the skills to becom e active participants and 
contributors (rather than purely consum ers and spectators) 
to discussions, debates, and designs for im proving living. 
STE A M  by D esign assists schools and students in clarifying 
goals for the future and in developing responsive 
institutional and personal m issions. 
D esign-based learning structures a creative, value-driven 
edge to STE M  education aim ed at connecting im aginations 
w ith a real purpose —  finding purpose and fulfilling 
potential in im proving the w orld. STE A M  builds on the 
inclusion of design by adding the places of the 
environm ent, built and natural, to the acronym . STE A M  by 
D esign, as a standards-aligned and e-Learning-supported 
pedagogy, introduces m ultifaceted design-based 
opportunities that transform  disciplinary-based instruction 
in separate classroom s into transdisciplinary practices. D BL 
shifts the prim ary m odel of learning about STE M  subjects, 
creating a synthesis that captures students’ interests and 
develops their abilities to contribute purposefully. If the 
purpose of life is indeed to find and m ake a life of 
purpose, individuals are responsible for using learning in 
new ly relevant w ays to im prove their com m unities. 
Learning by design then becom es the vehicle for im proving 
the hum an condition. 
Researchers at Stanford’s School of E ducation reports that 
design-based learning w idens possibilities for learning 
science. D eveloping and delivering design-based activities 
can increase m otivation for w orking and m ake students 
feel proud of their achievem ents. It can build confidence in 
students as lifelong thinkers, designers, and doers (Barron 
et al. 19 9 8 ). It cultivates a dynam ic and interactive learning 
environm ent encouraging active engagem ent in the 
construction of know ledge, in contrast to directed learning 
about science from  textbooks and lectures (D oppelt et al. 
2008 ). O verall, research supports encouraging evidence 
that such inquiry-based learning increases students’ 
science content know ledge and engagem ent. W orking on 
design challenges, students transfer know ledge into 
m ultiple tasks, learn through collaboration and doing, and 
develop positive attitudes tow ards science 
(D oppelt et al. 2008 , Fortus et al. 2004, 
Fortus et al. 2005, Puntam bekar & 
Kolodner 2005, M am lok et al. 2001). 
STEA M  and Environm ental Education 
The environm ent, both built and natural, 
connects the w orld at large w ith the w orld 
of im agination. A s governm ents globally 
rethink relationships betw een the built and 
natural w orlds in response to clim ate 
change and a globalizing econom y, 
educational leaders m ust recognize 
environm ental education as a priority 
across the curriculum . W ith D avid O rr, they 
m ust understand that “A ll education is 
environm ental education.” A s jobs 
increasingly rely on technology and 
integrated STE M  skills, all students need 
62 RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
STE A M  by D esign 
Figure 2-3 . N EEF Stem  & O ur Planet and Top 10 A pps for taking 
Learning O utdoors Posters. 
[PAGE 3]
opportunities to develop m athem atical, scientific and 
creative capacities. 
E nvironm ental education, approached from  the perspective 
of Buckm inster Fuller’s D esign Science site, bridges the 
study of the built and natural environm ents w ith 
engineering practices. For Fuller, D esign Science "the 
effective application of the principles of science to the 
conscious design of our total environm ent in order to help 
m ake the E arth's finite resources m eet the needs of all of 
hum anity w ithout disrupting the ecological processes of 
the planet." (https://bfi.org/design-science/prim er/ 
environm ental-design-science-prim er0 This approach 
m oves traditional engineering to a m ore relational field that 
dynam ically responds to change. D esign science is a 
problem -solving approach that entails a rigorous, 
system atic study of the deliberate ordering of the 
com ponents in our universe (Buckm inster Fuller Institute, 
2015). W ith N orth A m erican A ssociation for E nvironm ental 
E ducation Standards established in 2006, schools can align 
their teaching across several subjects w ith objectives that 
activate design thinking. For exam ple, the N A A E E  standards 
require learners “to design environm ental investigations to 
answ er particular questions —  often their ow n questions.” 
In the process, students engage in design-based processes, 
including the selection of m odes of inquiry appropriate to 
their questions and appropriate system s of m easurem ent 
and observation. Like engineers, they evaluate data and 
evidence for accuracy and relevance, and they present data 
in a variety of form ats including charts, tables, graphs, 
m aps, and flow  charts. 
A ll students, in every subject, need to be asking questions 
and interpreting inform ation. Learning about the earth, 
physical and life science, are sets of Science Standards. 
Studying hum ans and their societies is cultural, 
ethnographic and anthropological research of the 
hum anities. The third category of standards aligns w ith 
designers conducting site analysis and environm ental 
research as w ell as the developm ent of ethical 
responsibility. Standard IV, Personal and Civic Responsibility 
m ake the sam e contribution to character developm ent that 
design does. In keeping w ith the notion that all education 
is environm ental education, the N ational E nvironm ental 
E ducation standards include guidelines for the study of 
E arth as a physical system  and as a living environm ent. 
Standards addressing the study of the environm ent and 
society, including skills for analyzing environm ental issues, 
developing citizenship, and personal and civic responsibility 
align w ith the w ork of designers conducting site analysis 
and environm ental research as w ell as the developm ent of 
ethical responsibility. 
Standards guiding instruction in personal and civic 
responsibility m ake a contribution to character 
developm ent that is sim ilar to the contribution m ade by 
the design field, w here individuals are required to use their 
know ledge and expertise in responsible w ays. W e w ant 
[students] to be able to pursue independent inquiry in 
w hatever subject, in w hatever discipline, w hether it’s in 
school or not. W e w ant to get them  excited about learning. 
Teacher (M organ, et. al, 2007, p.ii). It is a bit like your 
lesson w here you teach yourself by doing things.... It’s a bit 
like teaching yourself to w ork individually. Student (M organ, 
et, al., 2007, p. ii). 
I.  Q uestioning A nalysis and Interpretation Skills 
II.  2.1 The E arth A s a Physical System  
2.2  The E arth A s a Living E nvironm ent 
2.3  Hum ans and Their Societies 
2.4  E nvironm ent and Society 
III. 3.1 Skills for A nalyzing and Investigating E nvironm ental 
Issues 
3.2 D ecision-m aking and Citizenship Skills 
IV  Personal and Civic Responsibility 
STEA M  and A rts and Science Integration 
Providing a philosophical foundation for learning that is life 
long, arts education provides students opportunities to 
develop unique w ays of know ing and interpreting the 
w orld. N ew  N ational Core A rts E ducation Standards 
prom ote achievem ent in the arts through guidelines that 
em phasize creating, responding, and connecting (N A E A , 
2014), activities that designers do daily. The arts, like 
design, rem ain a m edium  for ideation, or the 
conceptualization, study, and exchange of ideas.  The arts 
are a collection of skills and thought processes that 
transcend all areas of hum an thought (Sousa &  Polecki, 
2013, p. 17) including design and science. E lliot E isner’s 
(2002) classic ‘Ten Lessons the A rts Teach’ echo STE M 
com petencies and design aptitudes: 
• Perception of relationships (identifying patterns) 
• A ttention to nuance (looking closely) 
• Perspective of m ultiple solutions and m ultiple answ ers 
(iterative process) 
• A bility to shift goals (resiliency) 
• Perm ission to m ake decisions in the absence of rules 
(invention) 
• U se of im agination as source for content (innovation) 
• A cceptance of operating w ithin restraints (controlled 
variables) 
• A bility to see the w orld from  a visual perspective 
STE A M  by D esign 
63 
RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
[PAGE 4]
“The value of art and design to innovation is 
clear: A rtists and designers hum anize 
technology, m aking it understandable and 
capable of bringing about societal change. 
The tools and m ethods of a studio-based 
education offer new  m odels for creative 
problem  solving, flexible thinking and risk- 
taking needed in today’s com plex and 
dynam ic w orld.” (RISD  Stem  to STEA M  2012). 
A rts-based learning has em erged as an 
experiential and interdisciplinary approach to 
STEM  education that is increasingly seen to 
offer a distinctive new  set of tools to advance 
creativity and engagem ent am ong STEM 
learners (Seifter, 2014). 
STEAM  and N EXT G eneration Science 
Standards 
STE A M  by D esign gains further m om entum  as 
new  states adopt N E XT G eneration Science 
Standards (N G SS). Com pleted in 2013, the N G SS 
include engineering design in the K-12 science 
curriculum , significantly shifting science instruction tow ard 
alignm ent w ith design teaching and learning. The new 
E ngineering, Technology, and A pplications of Science (E TS) 
standards em erge from  the belief that students should not 
only learn how  scientific know ledge is developed and 
acquired, but they m ust also learn how  science is utilized, 
“in particular through the engineering design process.” 
(Henning, 2015) W hile science investigates that w hich is, 
design explores that w hich could be. This alignm ent opens 
the classroom  to design- based learning. 
N G SS Crosscutting concepts, one of three dim ensions of 
the N G SS, facilitate interdisciplinary connections and 
provide students intellectual tools that enrich opportunities 
for introspection, interaction, and disruptive innovation.  
A s overarching scientific them es that em erge across all 
scientific disciplines, the crosscutting concepts also bring to 
light the know ledge, language, and skills that are shared by 
the arts and sciences, suggesting new  opportunities for 
prom oting innovative thinking through trans-disciplinary 
learning and arts/science integration. (Figure 6) 
• Patterns: nature patterns to urban patterns 
• Cause and effect  
• Scale, proportion, and quantity 
• System s and system s m odels 
• E nergy and m atter 
• Structure and function 
• Stability and change 
STE A M  by D esign 
64 RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 5. The iterative 
design process, the 
evolution, conceptualization, 
and testing of ideas reflect 
engineering practices 
(Design Process, N EXT.cc, 
2012). 
Figure 6 . STEA M  by Design aligns w ith N G SS C ross 
C utting C oncepts; N EXT.cc 2015. 
[PAGE 5]
In fact, science education has been facilitating reform  for 
decades. Science for A ll A m ericans Benchm arks, A A A S, 
(19 8 9 ); a site unifying principles in N ational Science 
E ducation Standards (19 9 6) and N G SS ‘cross-cutting 
concepts' in N ational Science Teacher’s A ssociation’s 
Science A nchors (2010) engage design w ith engineering’s 
iterative testing and discovery of how  the w orld w orks. 
Today, N G SS Crosscutting Concepts prom ote  the 
interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary developm ent of core 
concepts as students look for system ic patterns,  cause and 
effect, as w ell as stability and change in the dynam ic 
ecosystem  that is our w orld (N G SS Fram ew ork, 2012). The 
N G SS now  com bines the disciplinary core ideas in physical, 
life, and earth and space science w ith scientific and 
engineering practices, em bedding design concepts, 
architecture (built environm ent) and environm ental 
education in K-12 science instruction.  
E ducation standards are changing. Concurrent ideas about 
hum anizing the ubiquitous use of technology, response to 
cultural, environm ental and econom ic change, and the 
creation of new  spaces, system s, and environm ents in 
preparation for a better future are objectives of STE A M  by 
D esign as prom oted by the e-learning D esignopedia, 
N E XT.cc The follow ing four exam ples of docum ented 
w orkshops- elem entary, m iddle school and high school 
provide case studies researching STE A M  by D esign 
teaching and learning. O r. The follow ing exam ples explore 
STE A M  by D esign teaching and learning as carried out in 
four w orkshops at the elem entary, m iddle school, and high 
school levels. 
C ase Study N ature Play Project 
The Challenge 
• Reim agine a playground 
• E m pathize w ith and provide for m ultiple age users 
• Brainstorm  new  types of play 
• E ngage natural light, air, w ater and habitat system s on 
school grounds 
• U se technology (Sound A pp) to analyze and respond to 
site 
• Introduce natural habitats in outdoor areas 
• Collaborate and com m unicate design proposals 
In this w orkshop, a 4th grade class from  a M ilw aukee 
Charter School w as challenged to initiate studies to 
transform  their asphalt playground into a nature play area. 
(Figure 8 ) 
These dual conditions, nature, and play, started an 
investigation into five topics: W ho played there? W hat types 
of play did the asphalt offer? W hat new  kinds of activities 
w ould they like to have? W hat settings w ould provide best 
for those types of play? Could nature be introduced, and, if, 
so, w here? Com bining place-based, outdoor education w ith 
an e-learning platform , children accessed N E X T.cc’s W ord 
M apping, Site A nalysis, D esign Thinking, Play, and O utdoor 
Play Journeys to initiate questions and brainstorm  ideas. 
(Figure 9 ) 
STE A M  by D esign 
65 
RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 7 . N G SS standards for 3 -5 (N EXT.cc 2015). 
Figure 8. Prototypical A sphalt Playground for Letting 
O ff Steam  instead of C reative, N ature and A ctive Play. 
[PAGE 6]
N ext, students w ere asked w hat kind of nature w ould they 
like to see in their playground. Beginning w ith grass, 
flow ers, and trees, students quickly expanded to birds, 
flow ers, squirrels, rabbits, butterflies and insects. (Figure 
10) 
Students then looked at their playground to learn the site, 
itself. They located w here they cam e in and out; they 
placed a north arrow  to understand the positioning of the 
playground and to determ ine w here it w as sunny and 
shady. They learned to tell tim e by the m ovem ent of the 
sun and the shadow  cast by the clock tow er. (Figure 11) 
Looking at aerial view s (or plans) and perspectives (people 
view s), they analyzed their playground. They discovered 
that they knew  w here it w as w indy, noisy and w et. They 
com pleted analysis diagram s and then placed their ideas 
onto the site plan draw ing (Figure 12) and into the site 
perspective (Figure 13). A s they collaged ideas onto a 
photograph of their schoolyard. (Figure 14) The audible 
energy filled the room . They w ere quite excited to 
transform  their playground. 
A rm ed w ith pen and paper, the class again w alked the 
playground to test if their analysis and placem ent of ideas 
w as accurate and responsive. Students physically located 
the area drain and determ ined it to be the low est part of 
the site. They also looked at tw o building facades facing 
STE A M  by D esign 
66 RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 9 . E-Learning support: Design Thinking, W ord M apping, Play and O utdoor C lassroom  Journeys. 
Figure 10. Students brainstorm ing/w ord lists of senses, nature, gam es, activity, etc. 
Figure 11. Studying Light and Tim e w ith a M obile A pp. 
[PAGE 7]
the playground as opportunities for a m ural and a planted 
area. They noted w here the playground w as in sun and 
shade and w hich areas w ere suited for different age play 
depending on daily recess tim es. 
U sing a sound app, students confirm ed the street they 
thought w as the busiest and the noisiest. It w as indeed the 
road to the north, w hereas the street to the w est w as 
quieter being buffered by som e buildings and trees. 
(Figure 16) This led to their reflecting on w hat could be 
used to buffer the noise from  this street. Som e m entioned 
trees. O thers suggested hills. 
Com ing back inside the students w ere eager to get to 
w ork. In three self-selected team s the students (Team 
G reen, Team  Fun, and Team  A ctive), the students spent 
forty-five m inutes building their dream  playgrounds. They 
exchanged ideas rapid fire and w orked collaboratively as 
they contributed ideas. (Figure 17) The transition from 
individual ideas to group synthesis m oved easily in the 
energy of generating a real m odel that w ould visualize 
three dim ensionally w hat m ight be possible. 
The team  m odels (Figure 18 ) reveal that the students took 
into account m uch that they had learned and filled their 
em pty playground w ith interactive play, gam es, gardening 
areas as w ell as nature habitats. They buffered the noise of 
STE A M  by D esign 
67 
RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 12. Site Program m ing Exam ples. 
Figure 13 . Envisioning Transform ation w ith 
N ature using C ollage. 
Figure 14. Experiential Vignettes. 
Figure 15. Testing Ideas on the Site. Figure 16 . U sing Free A pps to Visualize Research 
Findings. 
[PAGE 8]
the street, created a w ater habitat in the low  areas, used 
m urals to identify the school, and envisioned areas to run, 
jum p, clim b and play w hile allow ing for quiet areas to read, 
play board gam es, and have dress up and im aginary tim e. 
The school is now  considering fund-raising to im prove their 
play areas. 
The tw o-hour w orkshop exposed students to design 
thinking, design research, and the design process as a 
response to both physical realities and im agined 
possibilities. It provided a variety of activities to stim ulate 
and m otivate focused attention. It challenged students as 
they w orked individually and collaboratively. The w orkshop 
offered a range of w riting, draw ing, m apping and m odeling 
opportunities. Students w orked w ith college art education 
and design students and w ith professional architects as 
role m odels. Students w ere introduced to both design- 
based processes and science and technology research 
techniques. The w orkshop introduced a natural m ix of 
science, technology, engineering, environm ent, art, and 
m ath instruction for the school in a feasible and desirable 
project that w as engaging and fun! The School is currently 
considering fund raising to im prove the playground. 
G reen School W orkshop 
The C hallenge 
• Reim agine their school 
• O bserve, analyze and design w ith nature patterns 
• Brainstorm  renew able area dem onstrations 
• E ngage natural light, air, w ater and habitat system s on 
school grounds 
• U nderstand m ovem ent of sun and orientation north, 
south, east or w est 
• Introduce O utdoor Classroom s 
• D esign and prototype E arth D ay Pavilions for school 
grounds 
• Collaborate and com m unicate on D esign Proposals 
STE A M  by D esign 
68 RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 17 . C ollaborating in team s to build out ideas on the existing playground. 
Figure 18. Team  M odels of N ature Play C lassroom s. 
[PAGE 9]
The N ational E nvironm ental E ducation Foundation's 
(N E E F) research show s that alm ost 100%  of young 
children believe that the earth is w orthy of caretaking 
(N E E F, 2010). STE A M  by D esign charges academ ic 
learning w ith environm ental connections, digital fluency, 
and transdisciplinary activities. In this tw o hour G reen Your 
School W orkshop w ith thirty E SL students from  an inner 
city, M ilw aukee m iddle school, students, w ithout art 
instruction, rapidly took to draw ing, im agining and m aking. 
Students inhabited a letter w ith things im portant to them  in 
their life; they chose flow ers, birds, trees, friends, fam ily, 
m usic, sports, etc. They then chose a nature picture, 
sketched it, analyzed its form  and pattern, and 
diagram m ed its geom etry before designing an object, 
space, or environm ent. To m ove from  recording a nature 
pattern to using it as a design elem ent is an early step 
tow ard Biopilia, or ‘love of all things living’. 
U sing diagram s of their school, students placed cut paper 
solar panels, w ind turbines, outdoor classroom s, w ater 
gardens and urban agriculture plots based on site drainage, 
use, function and m ovem ent of the sun and w inter w inds. 
(Figure 19 ) O thers chose to learn new  digital skills (G oogle 
Scribble M aps) to digitally m ap changes to their school and 
began to teach other classm ates how  to use the free and 
friendly technology. 
(Figure 20) Students brainstorm ed and prototyped diverse 
‘E arth D ay’ structures to be built on their school cam puses 
to introduce new  sustainable practices. (Figure 21,22,23) If 
sim ilar art and design activities w ere allow ed for tw o hours 
per w eek, students w ould have the opportunity to explore 
and com m unicate changes in their schools, school 
com m unities, and cities. They w ould be encouraged to be 
engaged and active citizens. 
STE A M  by D esign 
69 
RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 19 . E-Learning support: G reen Schools, N ature Patterns, Site Program m ing, School G ardens, Pavilions. 
Figure 20. Students Draw n and Digitally C reate seam lessly in O ne W orkshop. 
Figure 21. Students learn new  digital visualization 
program s and start teaching other students and 
teacher. 
Figure 22. Students self-select m aterials to construct 
Earth Day Pavilions. 
[PAGE 10]
G reen C ities W orkshop 
The C hallenge 
• W hat m akes a city? 
• W hat m akes a green city? 
• Role Play of Civic positions 
• Coordinate system s of earth, air, w ater, food, and energy 
w ith built environm ent 
• D esign cities that analyze and respond to site 
• Introduce ideas about healthy cities 
• Collaborate and com m unicate on D esign Proposals 
In G reen City W orkshops, forty 6th-grade girls from  Chicago 
Public School form ed self- selected team s to build green 
cities. E -Learning Resources w ere shared online and 
throughout the three hour w orkshop. (Figure 24) Placing 
the com pass for the north arrow , and starting w ith a single 
house, girls established their hom e on a landscape close to 
a river. The basic needs of providing for a shelter, w arm th, 
w ater and food sprouted farm ing fields, barns for anim als, 
solar panels and w ater w ells. G irls experienced strategies 
for orienting, ventilating, hydrating, vegetating, insulating, 
optim izing, m aterializing single fam ily hom es. Finding the 
overlapping needs of house placem ent in relationship to 
the land, opened im agination to w hy things are placed 
w here and how  buildings can be m ore responsive to 
location. Connecting the hom es led to the activity of roads 
and path building. (Figure 19 ) 
N ext girls w ere asked to define the roles of the M ayor, 
Health and W ell-being Counselor (w ater, energy, food 
issues), Parks and Recreation, Business and Com m ercial, 
E ducation, Housing and Transportation D irectors as they 
developed M ain Streets, or sm all tow ns. G irls from  each of 
the six com m unities ‘traveled’ to  M ayor m eetings, 
Transportation Conferences, Business D evelopm ent 
Conferences, etc. to brainstorm  ideas about their 
responsibilities in contributing to urban design and 
planning. G irls, in new  ‘professional’ groups, w orked w ith 
professional fem ale m entors from  the City of Chicago, The 
School of the A rt Institute, and the Chicago Chapter A IA  to 
brainstorm  strategies and acquire necessary building 
m aterials. (Figure 26) 
STE A M  by D esign 
70 RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 23 . Students draw  nature patterns and G reen their school w ith renew able energy sources and an Earth 
Day Pavilion for an outdoor classroom . 
Figure 24. E-Learning Resources: G reen C ities, G reen H om es, Streets, Building Types, Skyscrapers. 
Figure 25. G irls locate their single fam ily hom es on 
the rural landscape. 
[PAGE 11]
W ith the new  charge to coordinate different approaches 
and system s of developm ent, girls collaborated vigorously 
to contribute ideas from  their disciplines, choosing w hat to 
place w here and how  best to create a healthy city. A s cities 
w ere developing, m entors delivered ‘new  residents’ w ith 
housing needs, business requests for Class A , B and C 
office buildings of com panies w anting to establish 
them selves in the city, new  schools or com m ercial 
buildings. G irls began to introduce greenhouses and 
vertical farm ing locations to feed their grow ing populations. 
A s the girls m oved ‘dow n the river’ to establish roads, 
bridges, and airports, they replaced forested areas but 
found areas w ithin their grow ing cities to replant them . 
G row ing cities increased dem ands on the river as a w ater 
source; girls responded w ith green roofs, a variety of 
porous green public space and w ater filtrating w etlands 
w ithin their cities. A t the end of the third hour, the team s 
presented their cities, introduced first by their m ayors, 
follow ed by the directors sharing their challenges and 
contributions. 
The experience w as an overpow ering success. Shy girls 
w ere em pow ered as leaders. 6th graders becam e civic 
agents of change. Friends becam e collaborators w orking to 
create a successful city together. The sheer fun of exploring 
building at the urban scale overpow ered the com plexity of 
decisions to be m ade. The activity becam e the energy and 
the m otivator creating a contagious and participatory 
learning environm ent. Students becam e pow erful activists 
in introducing green infrastructure to their cities. They 
becam e aw are of different types of buildings and the parts 
that the activities inside the buildings lend to city life. The 
underlying m ission of the all of the cities w as healthy living. 
This prem ise developed critical thinking in the girls as they 
considered w hat to place w here and how  to create 
adjacencies of urban needs. The students, their teachers 
and the m entors w ere all very proud of w hat w as 
accom plished in the w orkshop. The ecopolises w ere 
display as part of the Chicago Biennial ‘O utside D esign’ 
E xhibit. (Figure 27) 
STE A M  by D esign 
71 
RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 26 . G irls attend civic m entoring brainstorm ing sessions w ith local professionals. 
Figure 27 . Team s present their cities, noting successes and challenges. 

[PAGE 12]
E ducation, to affect environm ental and social issues, needs 
to develop expertise in future generations and equip them 
to be active participants in deciding urban issues (Brow n, 
Cook, &  G abel, 19 78 ). These com petencies, called, ’eco- 
literacy’, dem onstrate a personal affinity w ith the earth 
through outdoor activities (E LF, 2008 ). N oting a three- 
decade interrupt of advocacy for environm ental 
stew ardship, urbanization of the w orld from  the 19 50’s 
self-sufficient agrarian populations to the current linear 
nonrenew able fossil fuel-driven m etabolism  of the m ega- 
cities m akes the charge for design-based learning an 
em ergency situation. Children have inherited political and 
econom ic structures, and they have inherited an even 
greater responsibility to evaluate the possibility of living 
better on earth in the future. 
In a system s approach, adding eco-literacy as a new 
literacy to schools brings traditional subjects in connection 
to the larger earth, air, and energy cycles. Previously 
isolated subjects in classroom s then spill out onto the 
schoolyard and cross over into the school com m unity to 
ground children’s im aginations in the clim ate, topography, 
and landscape of the places w here they live and learn. 
STE A M  by D esign provides opportunities for students to 
interact w ith com plex system s and critical decision-m aking 
in the environm ents in w hich they learn. 
Energy H ack C PS Students 
The C hallenge 
D oes a STE A M  by a design-based approach to teaching 
com plex energy system s result in greater student 
com prehension and extended engagem ent w ith 
conserving energy and using renew able energy sources 
than traditional instructional m ethods? 
Chicago Public Library You M edia, Chicago A rchitecture 
Foundation D iscover D esign, and N E XT.cc E Learning 
D esignopeida (Figure 28 ) team ed on a HIVE  E nergy Hack 
G rant to conduct a series of design w orkshops that w ould 
introduce energy and energy hacking to Chicago Public 
School teens. The researchers used a STE A M  by D esign 
approach to learning about energy, changes in energy 
practice, and best energy practices. The researchers had 
three specific goals: 
1. E xplore STE A M  by D esign in the study of energy through 
a design-based approach. 
2. E xam ine w hether the fram ew ork of STE A M  by D esign 
learning could help students think and engage deeply 
about the topic. 
3. Investigate im plem entation of STE A M  by D esign 
m ethods in an after school w orkshop setting in a library 
teen center. 
By creating a learning experience w here students attem pt 
an energy hack on a library space, researchers 
hypothesized that students could gain a m ore functional 
and w orking understanding of conventional energy system s 
and opportunities for m indful energy use than students 
learning from  directed instruction. W e com bined aspects of 
research investigation, m odeling, and career engagem ent 
w ith design-based learning to create a series of sixteen fun 
and intense 9 0-m inute w orkshops over an eight-w eek 
period. This m ethodology prim ed w ith e-Learning, both 
w ith the N E X T.cc D esignopedia and w ith Chicago 
A rchitecture Foundation’s D iscover D esign, extended w ith 
real life m odeling and ending w ith design and m odeling of 
propositions at three different scales w as tested over 
students from  different schools and w ith m ultiple attention 
spans and learning techniques.  
This research w orked w ith eight high school students from 
different schools over 16 consecutive Tuesday and 
Thursday 9 0-m inute w orkshop sessions. The researchers 
conducted an inform al verbal survey of initial energy 
know ledge. Q uestions w ere asked about how  the students 
got energy, retained energy and used energy. Students 
w ere asked w here energy for their hom es cam e from . 
W orkshops w ere videotaped and observed, w ith the 
researchers m aintaining research logs. W orkshops began 
w ith directed presentations during w hich students w ould 
arrive, unpack, sit dow n, settle and focus. W orksheets of 
STE A M  by D esign 
72 RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 28. E-Learning Resources for the C PL, DD, N EXT.cc H IVE Funded Energy H ack. 
[PAGE 13]
different com plexity w ere com pleted w eekly to com bine 
listening and note taking skills and reinforce concepts and 
vocabulary through repetition and docum ented research.  
In W eek 1 w orkshops, students studied the science of 
natural light, its seasonal altitude and azim uth using quickly 
constructed house m odels and a solar chart. (Figure 29 ) 
A lso, students observed the color and heat of light 
betw een candles and incandescent, solar beads, 
fluorescent and LE D  lights.  They also studied absorption, 
refraction, reflection, and transm ission w ith prism s, 
different surfaces, and m aterials. (Figure 30) In evaluating 
the library space, they concluded that it w as so dark due to 
the absorptive colors of the floor and w alls and height of 
the ceiling lights. They also noted that there w as only 
general lighting and not accent or task lighting. 
Students com pleted a SketchU p m odel of the library 
space. (Figure 32) To test unobstructed sunlight com ing o 
the space, the students physically m easured (in strides) 
the street w idth in front of the library and visually estim ated 
the height of the building across the street to add to the 
m odel. They tested for sunlight from  the m orning, noon 
and afternoon sunlight on the library space. Som e students 
needed m ore support for m odeling the light. The 
researchers noted an initial difference in ability betw een 
students' concentration on research and their project 
explorations, but observed strong group-level collaboration 
w ithin the group and across sub groups. 
W eek II students used handheld photom eters to m easure 
light levels around the space, outside, and during a lighting 
lab tour of a local architectural firm . They learned about 
lam p types, lighting strategies and color rendition of lam ps 
from  practicing lighting designers and interior architects. 
(Figure 33) 
They com pleted take-hom e w orksheets locating types of 
bulbs: incandescent/com pact fluorescent, and LE D ; 
placem ent of bulbs: recessed/surface 
m ounted/scone/desk lam p/table lam p, and hours lights 
w ere on. Students w ere asked to read light bulb boxes and 
com pare bulb lum ens, w attage and life span. Students did 
energy calculations, W atts of energy used = w atts per bulb 
x tim e and com pared energy savings of  different bulbs. 
W eek III students talked about the types of energy sources 
they already knew . M ost students could m ention coal, oil, 
and natural gas. Researching renew able energy sources 
online, they found solar, w ind, nuclear and hydrological 
options. O ne student started research biking a stationary 
bike as an option. Students built and tested solar kits inside 
and w ind vane technologies outside and online. (Figures 
35, 36) 
STE A M  by D esign 
73 
RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 29 . Energy H ack W K I Building a Solar C hart 
(N EXT.cc & C hicago H IVE, C PL You M edia & C A F 
Discovery Design, 2015). 
Figure 3 0. Energy H ack W K I M ovem ent of the 
Sun(N EXT.cc & C hicago H IVE, C PL You M edia & C A F 
Discovery Design, 2015). 
Figure 3 1. Energy H ack W K I M ovem ent of the 
Sun(N EXT.cc & C hicago H IVE, C PL You M edia & C A F 
Discovery Design, 2015). 
Figure 3 2. Energy H ack W K I  M ovem ent of the 
Sun(N EXT.cc & C hicago H IVE, C PL You M edia & C A F 
Discovery Design, 2015) SketchU P M odel of Library 
Space. 
[PAGE 14]
STE A M  by D esign 
74 RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 3 3 . Energy H ack W K II Visit to SO M  Lighting 
LA B (N EXT.cc & C hicago H IVE, C PL You M edia & C A F 
Discovery Design, 2015). Figure 3 4. Energy H ack W KIII H om e Light and Energy 
A ssessm ents (N EXT.cc & C hicago H IVE, C PL You M edia 
& C A F Discovery Design, 2015). 
Figure 3 5. Energy H ack W K III Solar A ctivation(N EXT.cc 
& C hicago H IVE, C PL You M edia & C A F Discovery 
Design, 2015). 
Figure 3 6 . Energy H ack W K III Energy Producing W ind 
Vanes(N EXT.cc & C hicago H IVE, C PL You M edia & C A F 
Discovery Design, 2015). 
Figure 3 8. Energy H ack W K IV (N EXT.cc & C hicago 
H IVE, C PL You M edia & C A F Discovery Design, 2015). 
Figure 3 9 . Energy H ack W K IV (N EXT.cc & C hicago H IVE, C PL You M edia & C A F Discovery Design, 2015). 
[PAGE 15]
Students brainstorm ed w hat w as needed to im prove the 
library space in term s of personal com fort and use and 
took decibel readings of the noise in the space and 
checked the space w ith ultraviolet, hand held, m onitors for 
tem perature differentials and infiltration along door and 
w indow  openings. (Figure 38 ) They w ere surprised to find 
no leakage, even on a w indy day. Students w ere lent the 
photom eters and ultraviolet testers to study their ow n 
hom es and w ere surprised to find m any drafty areas. 
W eek IV students concentrated on U S energy and sm art 
grids. N one knew  how  m any energy grids there w ere in 
the U nited States or w hat m ain com ponents w ere needed 
to bring energy into their hom es. Students used N E XT.cc’s 
Sm art G rid Journey to learn the parts, m ap the three grids 
and put the parts of the delivery of energy to the hom e in 
order. They collaborated on m easuring the w indow s in the 
space, brainstorm ing energy hacks, and fabricating physical 
and digital prototype m odels. (Figures 38 , 39 ) They then 
turned their attention w ith their new  know ledge of light, 
light behavior, and program  needs, to m odel ideas. 
W eek V students m et w ith the Library Building M anager 
and the com pany that had recently retrofitted the lights 
throughout the library. (Figure 41) Students w ere am azed 
to learn that the library w as not heated! The thick w alls, 
heat from  the lights, m asses of books on shelves and heat 
from  library clients, kept the building w arm . Students 
critiqued the teen space as not being lit w ell and often 
cold. The Building M anager pointed out the addition of 
electrical w all units to the teen space as the recent energy 
saving m easure w as to install m ore energy efficient lights 
that gave off less heat and lasted longer. Students w ere 
able to see the energy audit com pany dem onstrate testing 
that they had done w ith inexpensive photom eters, 
tem perature and hum idity therm om eters, and infrared heat 
differential laser recorders. They w orked actively on a group 
m odel of the entire room , prototypes of energy hacks at 
the front w indow s, and com pleted a full scale m ock up. 
In the outtake survey, 75%  of the students reported 
know ing very little about careers in energy. A fter m eeting 
and w orking w ith professional architects, lighting designers, 
and engineers, over 50%  of the students felt like they 
knew  very w ell the diversity of careers in energy; the rest 
STE A M  by D esign 
75 
RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 40. Energy H ack W k V (N EXT.cc & C hicago H IVE, C PL You M edia & C A F Discovery Design, 2015). 
Figure 41. Energy H ack W k V (N EXT.cc & C hicago H IVE, C PL You M edia & C A F Discovery Design, 2015). 
[PAGE 16]
STE A M  by D esign 
76 RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 42. Energy H ack W K V M ultiple scale assim ilations of lighter colored surfaces, sound absorbing w alls, 
w indow  seats lit by solar activated light scoop. (N EXT.cc & C hicago H IVE, C PL You M edia & C A F Discover Design, 
2015). 
[PAGE 17]
felt that their understanding w as open and grow ing. A t the 
beginning of the w orkshop, half of the students adm itted 
to barely know ing about design research; at the end, 75% 
of the students felt they knew  the role of design as ‘half a 
pro’ and the others as ‘very w ell.' Before W eek I’s 
W orkshop, half of the students did not know  the difference 
in basic types of light bulbs w hile 75%  did not know  how 
to com pare bulb types regarding energy efficiency. A t the 
end, 100%  knew  the different light bulbs in the residential 
m arket and how  to com pare energy efficiency w hen 
buying bulbs. In the beginning, 75%  of students did not 
know  about footcandles, or lum ens, or the use of a 
photom eter to read light levels for general, task or accent 
lighting. By the last w orkshop, 75%  knew  how  to use light 
m eters very w ell and the other 25%  alm ost ‘half a pro.' In 
the beginning, 70%  had never thought about the electrical 
grid. A fter the eLearning support and w orksheet, 8 0% 
knew  about electrical grids very w ell, including their 
com ponents en route from  energy production to the 
hom e. A  third of the students reported that m easuring of 
the w indow  areas and library space w as difficult. A nother 
m entioned learning all of the new  stuff w as a bit 
troublesom e because they adm itted not know ing anything 
about energy before.’ In conclusion, students reported that 
the extended w orkshops w ere fun. Som e w rote that they 
w ould like to do it all over again. O thers w rote that it w as 
very educational. O ne student com m ented, “A  great w ay to 
show  the im portance and option to live w ithin our m eans.' 
The students, from  different schools, form ed friendships 
and a collaborative learning environm ent. O ne student 
reported, “It w as a fun and caring environm ent.’ U nlike the 
earlier single short session tw o-four hour w orkshops, the 
extended schedule of w orkshops allow ed for deeper 
learning, aw areness extensions, reflection and curiosity 
developm ent, and testing of propositions at m ultiple 
scales. Here are six recom m endations: 
1. Present challenges as involving relevant fields of 
inform ation. Support w eekly challenges w ith physical 
m aterials and E -Learning research. 
2. E ngage in prim ing activities students can practice and 
apply outside of school to build generalization and 
application. 
3. M oderate regular group reflection to encourage students 
to exam ine broadly ideas and issues. 
4. A llow  team s to study com ponents of the challenge and 
present findings to build a holistic understanding of the 
problem  and design solutions. 
5. Support w orkshops w ith practicing scientists, engineers, 
artists and designers to validate student learning and 
share career possibilities. 
6. Have students celebrate final presentation w ith reflection 
on the process. 
Students engaged in active STE A M  by D esign experiences 
becom e highly m otivated by the challenge and —  through 
extensive research, group w ork, and discussion —  becom e 
m ore deeply involved in com plex issues and the need to 
test proposed solutions. The variety of physical and digital 
prototyping give students chances to w ork individually or in 
groups through various m edium s. The w eekly sessions 
build m em ory as w ell as know ledge. The em otional 
connection of building m em ory of experience strengthens 
and deepens learning. The extended tim e also gave 
w orkshops participants to m eet w ith and interact w ith 
diverse professionals w orking in the field of energy and 
design. These opportunities expanded assessm ent to 
include know ledge about behavior w ith activism  for and 
responsibility to im plem ent changes in energy use for the 
students. These experiences deepened learning for all. 
STE A M  by D esign integrates inform ation about the 
environm ent, energy and energy use for rethinking energy 
consum ption at hom e and for com pleting an energy hack 
in a public library teen space. This study presented 
students w ith a com plex challenge, requiring student 
identification of and engagem ent w ith the know ledge and 
skills necessary to successfully solve the problem  or 
address the challenge. Students w ere introduced and used 
the design process of discovery (observation and reflection 
of current conditions and know ledge, research, 
docum entation, experim entation, data analysis, testing, 
evaluation and proposition at a range of scales) to im prove 
conditions. “Prim ing” exercises w ith everyday technologies 
introduced energy use of people and buildings 
sim ultaneously; students accessed E nergy and Buildings 
Like Bodies Journeys to assim ilate hum an energy use for 
living w ith buildings’ energy use for providing support for 
living com fortably.  They took visual notes in energy 
journals choosing and discussing energy sym bols and 
types of energy.  They com pleted w orksheets theoretically 
internalizing know ledge to a greater degree through active 
engagem ent and experim entation in learning about energy 
politically, socially, culturally, environm entally and 
technologically, rather than receiving the inform ation 
through traditional lecture or presentations. 
STEA M  E-Learning w ith a D ESIG N opedia 
Support for art and design-based learning receives support 
from  new  national K-12 standards, including N ext 
G eneration Science Standards (N G SS), N ational Core A rts 
Standards, and N orth A m erican A ssociation for 
E nvironm ental E ducation Standards. A s the new  standards 
stim ulate research and curriculum  developm ent across 
disciplines, new  learning opportunities arise in the form  of 
an ever-increasing num ber of standards-aligned curriculum 
resources, including interactive sim ulations and m odeling 
STE A M  by D esign 
77 
RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
[PAGE 18]
softw are. Students of all ages can now  access resources for 
form al, art and designed-based instruction across 
disciplines as w ell as for inform al, self-directed learning. 
O utstanding exam ples include projects in biology, robotics, 
and engineering design. The Learning, Research, and 
D esign Center at the U niversity of Pittsburg, Phet 
Interactive Sim ulations, the U niversity of Colorado at 
Boulder, and the Learn G enetics Resources at the 
U niversity of U tah, are innovative resources integrating 
research w ith technology, arts, and design-based learning. 
STE A M  by D esign supported w ith E -Learning em ulates the 
entrepreneurial m indset and stim ulates the individual’s 
ability to turn ideas into action (W orld E conom ic Forum , 
2009 ). The E nquiring M inds Report (M organ, et. al., 2007) 
explains how  students' ideas, interests, and experiences 
can inform  the content, processes, and outcom es of 
teaching and learning in schools. The student selected 
approach aligns design not only as an individual practice 
but also as a team  effort as students contribute diverse 
interests to w ork together sim ultaneously learning from 
each other in a design studio culture. STE A M  by D esign 
draw s upon the active learning m ethodologies of design 
education and tests new  ideas on a foundation of learned 
know ledge. It leads to processes that result in creativity, 
innovation, and continued grow th and exploration of the 
w orld (Z hao, 2012). 
Creativity and innovation m atter in today’s global econom y. 
President O bam a announced ConnectE D , an initiative to 
create access to professional e-Learning opportunities for 
teachers and students. N E X T.cc’s online e-Learning 
activities, research links, and access to everyday digital tools 
are valuable and needed as a ConnectE D  creativity and 
innovation resource that blurs learning, w ork, play, and fun 
w ith global citizenship. A ccording to E ileen Pollack, “Last 
year, the President’s Council of A dvisers on Science and 
Technology issued an urgent plea for substantial reform  if 
w e are to m eet the dem and for one m illion m ore STE M 
professionals than the U nited States is currently on track to 
produce in the next decade” (N ew  York Tim es, 2013). W ith 
STE M  jobs on the increase and not enough students to 
answ er the need, curriculum  that expands and diversifies a 
STE A M  -literate and STE A M  ready population can be 
achieved through developm ent of design opportunities for 
students.   
The future is transdisciplinary, so interdisciplinary 
connections betw een and across discrete subjects are 
necessary for schools today. O ther countries are shifting 
from  teaching traditional subjects to teaching ‘topics’ 
(D olasia, 2015). Teachers m ust cultivate opportunities for 
student-selected integration of topics for innovation. 
A cknow ledging that inform ation is accessible and 
constantly under construction, students need to have 
opportunities to construct know ledge pertinent to projects 
and be encouraged to pursue m aking, tinkering and testing 
w hile still in school. Standard academ ic foundations m ust 
now  serve as ‘kick-starters’ for real w orld practices. 
A ccording to M artinez and Stager (2013), “creation is the 
heart of creativity and is only m eaningful w hen grounded 
in action - it’s not a feeling, a m indset, or an outcom e” (p. 
STE A M  by D esign 
78 RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 43 . E-Learning Tools, Languages, Discovery and Design Journeys of N EXT.cc Designopedia. 
[PAGE 19]
8 0). These sentim ents resonate back to D ew ey’s w ork in 
E xperience &  E ducation w hen he w rites that if an 
experience arouses curiosity, strengthens initiative, and sets 
up desires and purposes that are sufficiently intense to 
carry a person over dead places in the future, continuity 
w orks in a very different w ay. E very experience is a m oving 
force (p. 38 ). 
In this grow ing netw ork of innovative leaders in arts and 
design-based learning, N E XT.cc, a D esignopedia that 
develops ethical im agination and environm ental 
stew ardship, takes its place as a leading proponent of 
STE A M  by D esign, particularly as it provides opportunities 
for students to develop design know ledge and skills about 
environm ental stew ardship. It links K-12 students w ith 
college students and careers in contem porary art, science, 
environm ent and design practices. It shares access to 
digital tools, learning videos, m useum  interactives and 
virtual field trips exploring tropics transdisciplinarily. 
N E XT.cc, founded as an educational non profit in 2007, 
introduces online transdisciplinary activities for students 
and teachers to inform ally investigate w ays of know ing 
about the w orld that are topically connected to 
contem porary w ays of exploring the w orld. D esign thinking, 
research, process, and m aking activities connect easily to 
other know ledge fields collaborating and sharing 
know ledge to inform  solutions to situations that need 
im provem ent. Introduced to, and m odified by, teachers in 
over one hundred professional developm ent w orkshops, 
over 9 0%  of teachers surveyed responded that this w ay of 
reaching learners w as im portant. The m ajority of 
responders did not introduce design in art or science 
classes prior to the w orkshop. W orkshops sparked a new 
and greater interest in learning in general. In every 
instance, students explored ideas using physical and digital 
tools. W orkshops w ith elem entary, m iddle school, and high 
school students instantly engaged learners, som e w ithout 
arts instruction, others not interested in science or 
m athem atics, to new  m odes of learning not encountered 
before. Post w orkshop, students reported enjoying the 
opportunity to use new  tools and sim ultaneous tools to 
im agine new  w ays of interacting w ith objects, m edia, space 
and environm ents; they also reported that they felt m ore 
connected w ith careers that continued the type of w ork 
they had encountered in the w orkshop. E -Learning 
supports inform al STE A M  interests of students, pedagogy 
of teachers, and transform ational changes in learning. A s 
other countries shift effective teaching from  the delivery of 
instruction to the building of an education system  and 
curriculum  around the potential of the learner (Bolstad & 
G ilbert, 2012), N E X T.cc’s D esignopeida supports tw enty- 
STE A M  by D esign 
79 
RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
Figure 44. N EXT.cc E-Learning Designopedia: C hoose Scales, Subjects & Topics. 
[PAGE 20]
first century technology accessed inform al learning in 
STE A M -related contexts for students and teachers. 
N E XT.cc hits the tw enty-first century learning sw eet spot! 
(W asserm an, 2012). It is brilliant scaffolding for design- 
based learning. N E XT.cc delivers content in context 
em bedded in tem plates and tools. It is at the right level 
betw een abstract concept and concrete instantiation. It 
builds both subject m atter m astery and m eta-cognitive 
skills. It reifies dom ain know ledge transparently as 
generative engagem ent. Seam lessly, it inculcates habits of 
attentive observation, heuristic discovery, and self- 
reflection. It speaks epistem ological authority w ith a light, 
non-pedantic voice. Beyond all that, N E XT.cc is intrinsically 
m otivating, w hich is the fancy term  for FU N ! (W asserm an, 
2012).  
STE A M  by D esign E -Learning uses everyday digital 
technology to connect form al learning w ith inform al 
learning, blurring boundaries and investing in lifelong 
learning m indsets. The blurring of boundaries shifts the 
teaching of disciplines to the teaching of ‘topics’. N E X T.cc 
assists school districts in connecting disciplines in design- 
based projects conceptually fram ed in topics. By linking 
scales of design affected by topics, students are introduced 
to system s thinking and relational thinking. 
Students and teachers report that using online resources 
helps to expand design opportunities and build inform ed 
decision- m aking; it allow s the student to process, rethink, 
and redesign w ith new  inform ation over tim e (E scuela 
Verde, 2014). STE A M  by D esign creates contexts for 
focused attention and extends concentration through 
initiation to the execution of ideas. Repeated as a process 
in response to different issues, design exercises and 
expands m inds as skills and experience scaffold. Building 
focus, selecting strategies and objectives, and realizing 
ideas build expertise. Let STE A M  by D esign capture the 
im agination of our schools w ith new  w ays of know ing, 
learning and m aking. 
References 
A A A S, Project 2061: Benchm arks online. Retrieved 11 N ov, 
2014, from  http://w w w .project2061.org/ 
publications/bsl/online/index.php 
Brow n, H., Cook, R., &  G abel, M . (19 78 ). Environm ental 
D esign Science Prim er . A dvocate Press, N ew  Haven, CT. 
Retrieved 15 Jan, 2015, from  http://w w w .bfi.org/design- 
science/prim er/environm ental-design-science-prim er 
Buckm inster Fuller Institute. D esign Science Prim er .
Retrieved 15 Jan, 2015, from  http://w w w .bfi.org/design- 
science 
D olasia, M eera. (2015). Finland schools to test teaching 
by topics instead of individualt Topics. Retrieved 1 A PR, 
2015, from  http://w w w .dogonew s.com 
/2015/3/29 /finland-schools-to-test-teaching-by-topics- 
instead-of-individual-subjects 
Fuller, R. Buckm inster. C osm ography . retrieved 15 Jan, 
2015, from  the w eb at http://w w w .bfi.org/design-science 
Cross, Jay. (2007). Inform al Learning: Rediscovering the 
N atural Pathw ays that Inspire Innovation and 
Perform ance . John W iley &  Sons, San Francisco, CA 
Cross, N igel. (2001). D esignerly w ays of know ing: D esign 
discipline versus design science . D esign Issues, 17(3), 
49 –55. 
D avis, M ., Haw ley, P., &  Spilka, G . (19 9 8 ). D esign as a 
C atalyst for Learning . A ssociation for Supervision and 
Curriculum , A lexandria, VA 
D ekay, M ark. (2011). Integral Sustainable D esign .
E arthscan, A shford Colour Press, N ew  York, N Y 
D ew ey, John. Experience & Education . (19 38 ). A 
Touchstone Book, Sim on &  Schuster, N ew  York, N Y 
D ream box. (2015). T he inner w orkings of the m iddle 
school m ath m ind: N urturing the m iddle school m ath 
m ind infographic . Retrieved 13 A pr, 2015, from 
http://w w w .dream box.com /blog/w orkings-m iddle-school- 
m ind-infographic 
D w eck, Carol. S. (2006). M indset: The N ew  Psychology of 
Success: H ow  W e C an Learn to Fulfill Our Potential. 
Ballantine Books, Random  House, N ew  York N Y 
E isner, E lliot. (2002). The A rts and the C reation of M ind, 
W hat the A rts Teach and H ow  It Show s . (pp. 70− 9 2). Yale 
U niversity Press, N ew  Haven, CT 
E PA  (2011). Report on the environm ent: Indoor air .
Retrieved 12 Feb, 2012, from 
http://cfpub.epa.gov/eroe/index.cfm ?fuseaction=list.listByS 
ubTopic& ch=46& s=343 
E sceula Verde Teachers &  Students. (2014). Retrieved 14 
Jan, 2014, from  http://w w w .next.cc/page/design# design- 
and-project-based-learning 
STE A M  by D esign 
8 0 RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
[PAGE 21]
G abrielson, Curt. (2013). Tinkering: K ids Learn by M aking 
Stuff . M akerM edia, Sebastapol, CA 
G regory, S. A . (ed). (19 66). D esign Science In The D esign 
M ethod. London, E ngland: Butterw orth. 
Henning, D ebra. (2015). N G SS C ross C utting C oncepts an 
N EXT.cc . Retrieved 11/01/2015 From  http://w w w .next.cc/ 
blog/ngss-crosscutting-concepts-next-cc 
Henning, D ebra. (2015). N EXT.cc aligns w ith N EXT 
G eneration Science Standards . Retrieved O ctober15, 
2015 from  http://w w w .next.cc/blog/next-cc-aligns-w ith- 
next-generation-science-standards 
Klein, Lisa. (2013). A ssignm ent: Education-potential new 
charter school . N E W S8 000.com  Retrieved 27 D ec, 2013, 
from  http://w w w .new s8 000.com /schools/assignm ent- 
education/A ssignm ent-E ducation-Potential-N ew -Charter- 
School/19 48 0532 
Krigm an, E liza. “ G aining STEA M : Teaching Science 
Through A rt ”. U s N ew s &  W orld Report. A ccessed online at 
http://w w w .usnew s.com /new s/stem - 
solutions/articles/2014/02/13/gaining-steam -teaching- 
science-though-art 
Landiver, Liana. C. (2013). D isparities in STEM 
em ploym ent by sex, race, and hispanic origin . A m erican 
Com m unity Survey Reports. Retrieved 15 Jan, 2014, from 
http://w w w .census.gov/prod/2013pubs/acs-24.pdf 
M alina, Roger. (2013). Tow ards a ‘C loud C urriculum ’ in art 
and science? The STE A M  Journal. Vol. 1:1, A rticle 11. 
Retrieved 11 N ov, 2013, from 
http://scholarship.clarem ont.edu/steam /vol1/iss1/11 
M artinez, Slyvia L., &  Stager, G ary S. (2013). Invent to 
Learn: M aking, Tinkering and Engineering in the 
C lassroom . Constructing M odern Know ledge Press, 
Torrence, CA 
M organ, J., W illiam son, B. W ., Lee, T., Facer, K., &  FutureLab. 
(2007). Enquiring M inds . Retrieved 8  Sept 2007, from 
http://w w w .enquiringm inds.org.uk/pdfs/E nquiring_M inds_ 
guide.pdf 
N ational Core A rts Standards. (2014). A  C onceptual 
fram ew ork for arts learning . Retrieved 28  O ctober 2014 
from  nccas.w ikkispaces.com 
N A E A . (2014). N ational visual arts standards at a glance .
Retrieved 11 N ov, 2014, from 
http://w w w .arteducators.org/research/naea-standards 
N ational E nvironm ental E ducation Foundation. (2012). 
STE M  and O ur Planet. Retrieved 17 July, 2014, from 
http://w w w .eew eek.org/  
N ational E nvironm ental E ducation Foundation. (2013). 
Technology and Our Planet Infographic . Retrieved  05 
M ay, 2013, from  http://w w w .eew eek.org/ 
N ational Research Council. (2000 ). H ow  People Learn: 
B rain, M ind, Experience, and School . U SA : N ational 
A cadem ies Press. Com m ittee on D evelopm ents in the 
Science of Learning w ith additional m aterial from  the 
Com m ittee on Learning Research and E ducational Practice, 
D ivision of Behavioral and Social Sciences and E ducation. 
N ational Science E ducation Standards. (19 9 6). N ational 
A cadem y Press , W ashington, D C. 
N ew com be, N ora. S. (2010). Picture this: Increasing m ath 
and science learning by im proving spatial thinking .
A m erican E ducator, Spring 2010, 29 − 43. 
N E X T.cc D esignoepdia Retrieved O ct. 1, 2013 from 
http://w w w .N E X T.cc 
N G SS (2013). N ext G eneration Science Standards: 
A ppendix G  – C rosscutting concepts . Retrieved 1 Jan, 
2014, from  http://w w w .nextgenscience.org/ 
sites/ngss/files/A ppendix% 20G % 20- 
% 20Crosscutting% 20Concepts% 20FIN A L% 20edited% 20 
4.10.13.pdf 
O E CD . PISA  (2012). Program m e for international student 
assessm ent: Results from  PISA  2012 . Retrieved 24 M ar, 
2013, from  http://w w w .oecd.org/pisa/keyfindings/PISA - 
2012-results-U S.pdf 
O rr, D avid. W . (2004). Earth in M ind: On Education, 
Environm ent and H um an Prospect . Island Press, 
W ashington, D C 
Pollack, E ileen. (3 O ctober 2013). “ W hy A re There So Few 
W om en in Science? ” The N ew  York Tim es M agazine. 
Retrieved  13 O ct, 2013, from 
http://w w w .nytim es.com /2013/10/06/m agazine/w hy-are- 
there-still-so-few -w om en-in- 
science.htm l?pagew anted=all& _r=0 
STE A M  by D esign 
8 1 
RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1 
[PAGE 22]
Project Tom orrow . (2014). The N ew  D igital Playbook: 
U nderstanding the Spectrum  of Students’ A ctivities and 
A spirations . Retrieved 23 Jul, 2014, from 
http://w w w .tom orrow .org/speakup/SU 13D igitalLearningPla 
ybook_StudentReport.htm l 
Reiser, Brian, J. (2013). W hat professional developm ent 
strategies are needed for successful im plem entation of 
the next generation science standards? Invitational 
Research Sym posium  on Science A ssessm ent. Retrieved 
10 N ov, 2013, from  http://w w w .k12center.org 
/rsc/pdf/reiser.pdf 
RISD ’s STEM  to STEA M  Initiative. (2010) . Retrieved 10 
O ct, 2010, from  http://stem tosteam .org/ 
Rothw ell, Jonathon. (2013). The hidden STEM  econom y .
Retrieved 13 Sept, 2013, from  http://w w w .brookings.edu/ 
~ /m edia/research/files/reports/2013/06/10-stem - 
econom y-rothw ell/thehiddenstem econom y610.pdf 
Seifter, Harvey. The A rt of Science Learning . Retrieved 14 
O ctober, 2014, from  http://w w w .artofsciencE Learning.org/ 
Silk, E . M ., Schunn, C.D .., Cary, M .S. The Im pact of an 
Engineering D esign C urriculum  on Science Reasoning in 
an U rban Setting . Journal of Science E ducation. June 
2009 , Volum e 18 , Issue 3, pp. 209 -223. 
Sim on, Herbert. A . (19 69 ). The Sciences of the A rtificial .
M IT Press, Cam bridge, M A  
Sink, R. (2012). D em ystifying STEM . Retrieved 10 O ct, 
2010, from  https://w w w .extendednotes.com / 
about/articles/E E N _A rticle_201205.pdf 
Sousa, D avid A ., &  Pilecki, THom as. (2013). STEM  to 
STEA M : U sing B rain-C om patible Strategies to Integrate 
the A rts . Corw in, Thousand O aks, CA 
Sparks, Sarah. (2013). 'G row th M indset' G aining Traction 
as School Im provem ent Strategy. Education W eek .
Retrieved 17 D ec, 2014, from 
http://w w w .edw eek.org/ew /articles/2013/09 /11/03m ind 
set_ep.h33.htm l?tkn=XO XFBN Q 4B% 2FHIIr0Q E 4A m ncfSnI 
8 rA XD 8 % 2B6hR& cm p=clp-edw eek 
Stanford U niversity School of E ducation : Retrieved 1 
O ctober , 2015 from  D esign-based Learning to Innovate 
STEM  Educatio n https://gse- 
it.stanford.edu:research:project:dbl 
U nited States D epartm ent of Com m erce E conom ics & 
Statistics A dm inistration. (2011). STEM  jobs now  and for 
the future . Retrieved from  http://w w w .esa.doc.gov/ 
reports/stem -good-jobs-now -and-future 
U nited States D epartm ent of Labor, Bureau of Labor 
Statistics. Retrieved  30 July 2013, from 
http://w w w .bls.gov/ooh/life-physical-and-social- 
science/environm ental-scientists-and-specialists.htm 
N A E P M easurem ents (2013). The nation’s report card: 
M athem atics and reading 2013 . Retrieved 15 N ov, 2013, 
from  http://w w w .nationsreportcard.gov/ 
subject/reading_m ath_2013/pdf/infographic.pdf 
The U S Bureau of Labor Statistics. Retrieved 10 Jan, 2014, 
from  http://w w w .bls.gov/ooh/life-physical-and-social- 
science/environm ental-scientists-and-specialists.htm  - tab-6 
W agner, Tony. (2012). C reating Innovators: The M aking of 
Young People W ho W ill C hange the W orld . Scribner, N ew 
York, N Y 
W asserm an, A rnold. (2012). Received via em ail from 
arnold@ ideafactory.com 
W ilson, E dw ard. O . (19 9 8 ). C onsilience: The U nity of 
K now ledge . Vintage Books, N ew  York, N Y 
Z hao, Y. (2012). W orld C lass Learners: Educating C reative 
and Entrepreneurial Students . Corw in, Thousand O aks, CA 
STE A M  by D esign 
8 2 RESEA RC H 
D esign and Technology E ducation: A n International Journal 21.1
